Text 1
10.1093/cercor/bhj081
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 1. pca of molecular variables. pca of mrna expression profiles of different markers from 157 neocortical neurons. in this two-dimensional plot, a dot represents a molecular variable, whereas the close clustering of dots indicates positive correlation between the expressions of the corresponding molecular variables in the sampled neurons. note that vglut1 was close to peptide receptors nk-3, cck-b, and crf-1 and that vip was close to crf and nkb.']. Reference sentences:[correlated expressions of molecular markers on the basis of coexpression of the different mrnas at the single-cell level a pca was performed such that mrnas with closely related expression pattern will appear close to each other and mrnas with unrelated expression are farther apart (fig 1).the pca clearly separated gad and vglut1 (fig 1 and table 2) as expected from their differential distribution in interneurons and pyramidal cells respectively.the pca further disclosed 3 groups of markers (fig 1).in con- trast cck did not correlate with any marker of neocortical neuronal types (fig 1 and table 2).these results suggest that pyramidal cells selectively express nk-3 crf-1 and cck-b and thus would be the primary figure 1.analyses based on the combination of the expression profiles of cellular markers (mentioned in fig 1) and electrophysiological properties (see material and methods).]
Correlated expressions of molecular markers in single cells based on coexpression of different genes, revealing distinct clusters of marker coexpression patterns.

Text 2
10.1038/NMETH.1315
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 4 | correlation plots of the quantile-normalized mrna-seq reads for oocytes. (a) one wild-type oocyte versus another wild-type oocyte. (b) one dicer1à/à oocyte versus another dicer1à/à oocyte. (c) wild-type oocyte versus dicer1à/à oocyte. (d) wild-type oocyte versus ago2à/à oocyte. all of the reads with more than fourfold changes were plotted in red.']. Reference sentences:[as these complementary strands were annealed from sample preparation until the emulsion pcr step the high con- cordance illustrated the accuracy of our sequencing technique (supplementary fig 3 online) and mapping algorithms (supple- mentary fig 4 online).reads for dicer1=/= ago2=/= and wild-type mature oocytes (of a mixed genetic background of 129/sv c57bl/6j and mf1 strains) (fig 4).to determine the reproducibility of our assay we com- pared the sequence data for two separately processed single wild- type mature oocytes and found that they showed very similar transcriptome profiles (r ¼ 0.986; fig 4a).this was also the case for two independently processed dicer1=/= single oocytes (r ¼ 0.989; fig 4b and supplementary fig 5 online).the transcriptome difference between ago2=/= and wild-type oocytes (r ¼ 0.938; fig 4d) was clearly less than that between dicer1=/= and wild-type oocytes (r ¼ 0.919; fig 4c) which is consistent with the fact that the phenotype of ago2=/= oocytes is similar to but milder than that of dicer1=/= oocytes (m. kaneda f.t.]
Summary: Correlation plots of mRNA-seq reads show reproducibility between wild-type and mutant oocytes, with higher similarity within the same genotype.

Text 3
10.1038/NMETH.1315
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 2 | mrna-seq of single blastomeres and oocytes. (a–d) the correlation plots of the reads of plus and minus strands for a single blastomere of a four-cell stage embryo (a), a single wild-type oocyte (b), a single dicer1à/à oocyte (c) and a single ago2à/à oocyte (d).']. Reference sentences:[we obtained more than 100 million 35-base reads and 50-base reads from the single blastomere (table 1 and supplementary fig 2 online; in the latter analysis we mainly focused on the 50-base reads).the concordance between the sequences of the plus and minus cdna strands was high (fig 2a and supplementary table 1 online).this was also the case for wild-type dicer1=/= and ago2=/= oocytes (fig 2b–d).]
Patterns of correlation between plus and minus strand reads in single cells were analyzed, showing high concordance across different cell types.

Text 4
10.1101/gr.110882.110
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 5. graph-based visualization (‘‘cell map’’). (a) cells, represented by graph nodes (circles) were laid out randomly, and edges (gray lines) were drawn from each cell to the five other cells it was most highly correlated with. then, a force-directed layout was used to lay out the graph on the plane. in this stage, cells repelled each other uniformly but were held together by edges acting as elastic springs. the resulting visual map was consistent with known cell identities (es cells in orange, mefs in blue), with a single apparently misplaced cell. note the lack of edges connecting the clusters, showing that the graph has separated into disjoint components. (b) the same data analyzed by principal component analysis (pca), again with a single apparently misplaced cell but with less distinct separation by cell type. (c ) the expression of selected genes is shown on a logarithmic color scale (inset, upper right). the top row shows genes enriched in mefs, while the bottom row shows genes enriched in es cells and known to be es cell markers']. Reference sentences:[the measured expression levels agreed with those obtained by q-pcr and to a lesser extent microarray hybridization (supple- mental fig 5).we then used a force-directed layout to project the graph to two dimensions (fig 5a) resulting in only a single apparently misplaced cell.a conventional principal component analysis (pca) revealed the same separation (fig 5b) but less distinctly.we then projected gene expression data onto the map which provided an easy way to quickly grasp gene expression patterns in both single cells and in the clusters representing cell types (fig 5c).in fact the more cells are added the more accurate will be the aggregate data obtained from each distinct cell type (cluster) and the better the resolution in the ‘‘cell type space.’’ for example the es cells here were sampled at 241 000 reads per cell on average but altogether figure 5.]
Summary: Correlation patterns between cells visualized through graph layout and gene expression patterns in single-cell clusters.

Text 5
10.1016/j.celrep.2012.08.003
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 2. benchmarking of cel-seq on mouse es and mef cells (a) cel-seq pearson’s correlation coefficients among the es and mef cells (on log10 tpm values), computed as previously described by islam et al. (2011), on the 1,000 genes most highly expressed in es cells and 1,000 genes most highly expressed in mef cells (1,385 genes). (b) mean number of genes detected above two thresholds (10 and 100 tpm) across the es and mef cell types using cel-seq and the ‘‘strt’’ pcr-based method (islam et al., 2011). error bars indicate 95% confidence intervals. (c) reproducibility according to expression level. for each gene the coefficient of variation was computed across the log10 tpm values in the es cells for the strt and cel-seq methods. the genes were then ranked by expression level in bins of 200 from high to low. for each bin the mean and sd of the coefficients of variation of the genes are shown. see also figure s2 for additional analyses.']. Reference sentences:[further- more cel-seq detected significantly more genes in the es cells (figure 2b).a b c figure 2.]
Summary: Correlation patterns of gene expression levels between ES and MEF cells using Cel-seq method.

Text 6
10.1038/ncb2709
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 4 single-cell expression analysis of haematopoietic transcription factors identifies previously unrecognized putative regulatory interactions between key transcription factors. (a) hierarchical clustering of spearman rank correlations between pairs of transcription factors for all 597 cells together and for the different cell types individually as indicated. genes in all heat maps are ordered according to the clustering performed for all data. positive correlations (red) may result from the coordinate expression or lack of expression of pairs of factors in individual cells, whereas negative correlations (blue) can result either from the expression of one factor in the']. Reference sentences:[correlation analysis and hierarchical clustering of the 18 transcription factors across all 597 haematopoietic stem/progenitor cells revealed both positive and negative correlations (fig 4a top left panel).to establish whether such regulatory relationships were stable or dynamic during differentiation we repeated the correlation analysis for each of the five stem/progenitor populations individually (fig 4a).together these results indicate that expression of the core haematopoietic transcriptional regulatory network is dynamic (figs 2 and 3) which is presumably intimately connected to the dynamics of regulatory interactions between the components of the network (fig 4).significant positive and negative correlations between transcription factors were displayed as a putative interaction network (fig 4b).two newly predicted regulatory links (gata2–gfi1 and gata2–gfi1b) suggested possible involvement of gata2 in modulating the cross-inhibitory relationship between gfi1 and gfi1b (fig 4b) which was of particular interest to us because we had seen downregulation of gata2 and gfi1b accompanied by reciprocal upregulation of gfi1 in a recent transcriptomic and epigenomic analysis of leukaemia development in an mll- enl-driven mouse model of acute myeloid leukaemia52 (see supplementary fig s3).]
Summary: Identification of positive and negative correlations between transcription factors in haematopoietic cells, revealing potential regulatory interactions within the core transcriptional network.

Text 7
10.1038/ncb2709
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 5 direct repression of gata2 by gfi1 through a distal enhancer element provides a mechanism for negatively correlated expression. (a) chip-seq analysis of gfi1 in primary mast cells indicates that gfi1 binds to the gata2 locus at the −83 kb regulatory element. (b) representative embryos demonstrating lacz staining for the gata2 −83,−3 kb and combined −3/ − 83 kb regulatory element reporter constructs. the −83 kb region alone (sv/lacz/ − 83) showed consistent staining of the midbrain, hindbrain and spinal cord, but no haematopoietic staining. the −3 kb enhancer (−3/sv/lacz) had only hindbrain staining. the −83/ − 3 kb combined element']. Reference sentences:[this gfi1 chip-seq experiment confirmed gfi1 binding to the gata2 −83 kb region in primary mouse blood cells (fig 5a).analysis of lacz expression in embryonic day (e)11.5 transgenic mouse embryos demonstrated consistent staining in the midbrain hindbrain and spinal cord (fig 5b) all known domains of endogenous gata2 expression56.transgenic embryos carrying a combined enhancer construct (−3/sv/lacz/ − 83) exhibited the neural activities of both of the individual enhancers (fig 5b).compared with control transfection assays we observed that co-transfection of a gfi1 expression construct caused a 40% reduction in reporter activity (fig 5c).sup pl e me nta ry i n f o r m at i o n www.nature.com/naturecellbiology 5 supplementary figure 5 moignard et al a b figure s5 multiple species alignments for gfi1b +16 and +17 kb regulatory regions.]
Summary: Negative correlation in gene expression due to direct repression of gata2 by gfi1 through distal enhancer elements.

Text 8
10.1186/gb-2013-14-4-r31
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure s13: success rate of whole-transcript amplification from single cells sorted by fluorescence-activated cell sorting (facs). figure s14: amount of total rna from a single cell at each cell-cycle phase. figure s15: principal component analysis (pca) of single cells from different cell types at different cell-cycle phases. figure s16: over-representation analyses for principal component (pc) of single cells from same cell types in the same cell-cycle phase (g1). figure s17: scatter plots of conventional rna-seq and quartz-seq using 50 es cells in the g1 phase of the cell cycle and quartz-seq using 10 pg of total es rna. figure s18: effect of carried-over buffer for pcr efficiency. additional file 2: supplementary note. additional file 3: figure s7: all scatter plots additional file 4: table s1. all results of linear regression and correlation analyses. additional file 5: supplementary movie 1. principal component analysis (pca) with single-cell quartz-seq data of embryonic stem (es) and primitive endoderm (pre) single-cell preparations. additional file 6: supplementary movie 2. principal component analysis (pca) with single-cell quartz-seq data of embryonic stem (es) cells in different cell-cycle phases. additional file 7: table s2. sequencing information. additional file 8: table s3. primer information.']. Reference sentences:[]
Summary: Correlation patterns between single cells in different cell types and cell-cycle phases were analyzed using PCA and over-representation analyses.

Text 9
10.1038/ncb2798
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure s3 rnaseq analysis during pgc specification; integrative analysis of pgc transcriptome, blimp1 induced changes in p19ec profiles, and blimp1targets. (a and b). gene ontology analysis showing functional categories of genes repressed and induced respectively, between e7.5 pgcs and somatic cells and the genes from the comparison that are bound by blimp1. (c). relative enrichment of blimp1 binding regions and the scores associated with genes differentially expressed between e8.5 pgcs and e7.5 prdm1 (encoding blimp1)-ko pgc–like cells. (d). correlation analysis of differentially expressed genes during pgc specification and upon blimp1 expression in p19ecs. the pearson correlation coefficients are indicated in the bottom half for each pair-wise comparison and each point on the plot indicates the differential expression of a gene in the comparisons indicated on the x- and y-axes respectively by the juxtaposition to the squares along']. Reference sentences:[]
Summary: Correlation patterns between gene expressions during PGC specification and upon Blimp1 expression in single cells.

Text 10
10.1038/nature12364
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 3 | network analysis of human pre-implantation development. a, hierarchical cluster tree showing co-expression modules identified using wgcna. modules correspond to branches and are labelled by colours as indicated by the first colour band underneath the tree. remaining colour bands reveal highly correlated (red) or anti-correlated (blue) transcripts for the particular stage. b, heatmap showing relative expression of 7,313 genes in']. Reference sentences:[thisunsupervisedandunbiasedanalysisidentifieddistinctco-expression modules corresponding to clusters of correlated transcripts (fig 3a).in total 8301 genes were part of human oocyte to morula stage-specific modules revealing a step-wise requirement of new transcripts that are involved in gene transcription (4-cell) post-transcriptional rna processing (8-cell) and then protein translation and cell energetics (morula) (fig 3b).as expected the oocyte module undergoes gradual degradation over the course of development whereas modules in the 4- to 8-cell trans- ition show sharp degradation (threefold) and activation (fourfold) (fig 3c).]
Patterns of correlated gene expressions in different developmental stages were identified through network analysis.

Text 11
10.1038/nmeth.2694
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 2 | correlation between single-cell rna-seq and single-cell multiplexed qpcr for each sample preparation method. correlation coefficients were computed from log2transformed values. a linear regression line (color) and the y = x line (black, dotted) are also shown in each panel. shading 2 represents the 95% confidence interval for each regression line. for rna-seq data, fpkm values for each of gene of interest were normalized to the median fpkm for each cell and log2 transformed. for qpcr data, threshold cycle (ct) values for each gene of interest were normalized to the median ct value for each cell (∆ct), which also represents a fold change over the median expression. ∆ct values are already in log2 space and were directly plotted. error bars, standard error (n values as in fig 1a).']. Reference sentences:[the pair- wise correlation of transcript abundance was >0.9 (pearson cor- relation coefficient) for all comparisons among the four samples (supplementary fig 2) indicating a high level of reproducibility among samples generated by the c1 platform.to evaluate accuracy we compared the expression values of 40 genes generated by single-cell qpcr and rna-seq (fig 2).the standard error was small relative to the expression level of each gene (fig 2).figure 2 | correlation between single-cell rna-seq and single-cell multiplexed qpcr for each sample preparation method.]
Summary: Correlation between single-cell RNA-seq and qPCR data for gene expression levels, showing high reproducibility and accuracy.

Text 12
10.1101/gr.161034.113
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 4. gene coexpression modules derived from single gm12878 cells. weighted gene correlation networks were constructed using the wcgna r package (langfelder and horvath 2008). (a) expression levels and hierarchical clustering of genes within modules (modules are sorted by number, which corresponds to their size) in single cells and pool/split experiments. only genes are clustered (dendrograms on the left), and the identity of the cells and pool/split experiments is the same in each column (two right panels). the absolute expression values of genes belonging to representative go categories associated with cell cycle phases (modules 1 and 6) and mrna processing and splicing (module 2) are also shown. (b) distribution of cell cycle states in a representative gm12878 cell population, in growth media (gm), and picking media (pm). the fraction of cells in m phase is consistent with one such cell being picked in a sample of 15.']. Reference sentences:[the expression patterns of these modules were mostly well-differentiated among single cells and were absent from pool/split libraries (fig 4b; sup- plemental fig 34).this in- cluded some enrichment for the g1- and s-phase go terms and also contained most genes that are generally highly expressed (fig 4a).we measured the fraction of unsynchronized gm12878 cells in the g0 + g1 s and m phases of the cell cycle using flow cytometry (fig 4b).this is an intriguing observation as module 3 was mostly driven by the two cells exhibiting the highest total number of mrna molecules per cell (fig 3c; fourth and fifth columns in clustergram in fig 4a) consistent with a generally elevated metabolic state.no robust explanatory correlation was evident (supplemental fig 46–-50) and we expect that data with less technical stochasticity will be needed to illuminate relationships of this kind.if all mrnas from a gene in a given cell at a given moment are the product of one or a linked series of such bursts all figure 4.we detected between 200 and 2000 novel splice junctions satisfying these criteria in each individual cell (supplemental fig 43).these were concentrated close to al- ready annotated splice sites (supplemental fig 40bc).the proportions observed were in- dependent of the read coverage and estimated number of copies per cell thresholds applied (supplemental fig 40a).while this result could be greatly affected by psmc issues it was independent of the read and estimated transcript copies threshold used (supplemental fig 40) suggesting that most novel splices are indeed only present in a small fraction of cells.in contrast in single cells one dominant splice site was the norm for annotated junctions except for very highly expressed genes ($100 copies per cell) for which a wide diversity of splice site usage was seen (fig 5d; details in supplemental fig 42).these results differ significantly from the same analysis carried out on novel splice junctions (fig 5e; supplemental fig 43).(fig 5fg; supple- mental fig 44).a threshold of 10 estimated copies and a coverage of 10 reads was applied but results are essentially the same independent of the thresholds used (supplemental fig 40a).distribution of 59 c scores for annotated splice junctions at two different detection thresholds in single-cell libraries (see supplemental fig 41 for more detail).(e upper and lower) distribution of 59 c scores for novel splice junctions at two different detection thresholds in single-cell libraries (see supplemental fig 42 for more detail).]
Patterns of gene coexpression modules related to correlation among single cells, with enrichment for cell cycle and mRNA processing terms.

Text 13
10.1038/nmeth.2772
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 2 | reproducibility of molecule counting. (a,b) pairwise correlation coefficients calculated for ercc spike-in control rna (a) or endogenous genes (b), using molecule counts (n = 41) and prepared with (187ds) and without (187ss) nine additional cycles of library pcr. (c) pairwise correlation coefficients as in b but counting reads instead of molecules (n = 41). (d) scatterplot showing the pairwise comparison of two wells indicated in a. red squares and blue dots show comparisons within and between libraries, respectively. (e) scatterplot showing the two cells indicated in b based on molecule counts. (f) scatterplot as in e but using reads instead of molecules. (g) scatterplot as in d but using reads instead of molecules. (h) distribution of molecule counts for a single ercc spike-in transcript (gray dots) compared with the cumulative density function of the poisson distribution (red line). (i) mrna capture efficiency shown as observed molecule counts versus number of spiked-in molecules for ercc control rna transcripts. the shaded bands indicate efficiencies above (dark gray) and below (light gray) 20%. each red dot represents the average of a single ercc rna across 96 wells. similar results were obtained in one replicate experiment.']. Reference sentences:[during reverse transcription each cdna molecule was tagged with a 5-bp random sequence serving as umi (fig 1a and supplementary fig 2).(fig 2 and supplementary fig 6) a fivefold improve- ment over our previously published protocol5.g number of reads number of reads 1 10 10000 100 1000 1 10 100 1000 10000 e number of molecules number of molecules 1 10 100 1000 1 10 100 1000 d number of molecules number of molecules 1 10 100 1000 1 10 100 1000 aercc control rna 0.95 1.0 187ss 187ds 187ss 187ds genes (molecules) b 187ss 187ds 187ss 187ds 0.6 1.0 genes (reads) c 187ss 187ds 187ss 187ds 0.6 1.0 h cumulative probability number of molecules 30 40 50 60 70 0 1 f number of reads number of reads 1 10 10000 100 1000 1 10 100 1000 10000 i 1–20% 20–100% 103 102 101 100 103 104 102 101 100 10–1 spiked molecules per cell observed molecules figure 2 | reproducibility of molecule counting.we determined the pairwise correla- tion coefficients (fig 2a–c) and visualized typical examples as scatterplots (fig 2degh).the techni- cal reproducibility was excellent as demonstrated by correlation coefficients >0.95 for ercc spike-in control rna (fig 2a).the scales for read-count scatterplots (fig 2gh) are arbitrary as the total number of reads differs between wells (and could be increased arbitrarily through addi- tional sequencing runs).in contrast scales for molecule-counting scatterplots (fig 2de) are absolute and would not change appreci- ably if the number of reads were increased.we observed a smooth distribution of the number of counted molecules consistent with accurate counting and approaching the theoretically optimal poisson distribution (fig 2h and supplementary fig 8).this additional amplification was used only for the 187ds sample (fig 2).]
Patterns related to correlation between molecule counts and reads, as well as reproducibility of molecule counting, were shown in the figure.

Text 14
10.1126/science.1247651
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 2. single-cell dissection of immune cell types. (a) color-coded correlation matrix of singlecell mrna profiles. groups of strongly correlated cells that are used to initialize a probabilistic mixture model are numbered and marked with white frames. (b) circular a posteriori projection (cap) plot summarizing the predictions of the probabilistic mixture model for the cd11c+ cells. each cell is projected onto the two-dimensional sphere according to the posterior probability of its association with the model’s classes. the dimensions of the cap plot should not be interpreted linearly or as principal components. (c) bar plots depicting similarities of mean rna counts in inferred types and immgen expression profiles. the most correlated group of immgen profiles is colored specifically as indicated for each type. (d) shown are cap plots depicting single-cell rna-seq data sets acquired from marker-based facs sorting for single pdcs, b cells, nk cells, and monocytes. sorted cells are shown in red; density of the cd11c+ pool is shown in gray.']. Reference sentences:[we have implemented a probabilistic strategy for unsupervised classification of cells into “ideal- ized types.” hierarchical clustering (fig 2a) defined seeds of highly correlated cells leading to the ini- tialization of a probabilistic mixture model and classification of single cells into types or families of homogeneous states.visualization of the multi- class data by using a new circular a posteriori projection technique (fig 2b) represented the splenic cell population as a combination of several molecular behaviors five of which (classes i to v) being distinctively separated from a group of more loosely defined classes (classes vi and vii).projection of the new data onto the model we generated from the splenic population showed remarkable com- patibility between the traditional marker-based cell-type definition and the marker-free single-cell rna-seq technique (fig 2d).]
Patterns of correlation between single cells are used to initialize a probabilistic model for cell classification, with distinct cell types identified based on gene expression similarities.

Text 15
10.1126/science.1247651
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 4. gene modules and the distribution and redistribution of dc states. (a) single-cell correlation matrix for cells classified as dcs, showing detected subclasses using white frames. (b) type/class distributions of singlecell rna-seq data from three different facs-sorted dc (cd11c enriched)']. Reference sentences:[dc4 dc3 dc1 dc2 a b gene modules (dc 2h lps) gene modules (dc 2h lps) c % inferred 100% 0% b mf nk mo pdc dc1 dc3 dc2 dc4 facs sorted populations inferred dc (class vi-vii no lps) -0.5 pearson +0.5 inferred dc (class vi-vii no lps) -0.15 pearson +0.15 fig 4.additional single-cell sequencing of cd8+ cd86+ cd8int cd86– and cd4+ facs- sorted populations (fig 4b) showed that this or- ganization can be approached to a limited extent with existing marker-based classification.]
Summary: Correlation patterns between different subclasses of DCs based on gene modules and distributions in single-cell RNA-seq data.

Text 16
10.1016/j.cell.2014.03.036
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 1. sorted single cells can be grouped into corresponding cell identities using multivariate analyses (a) representative image of e10.5-old pax2cre+/à;gt(rosa)26sormtdtomato,megfp embryo. green ﬂuorescence (megfp) indicates cre-mediated recombination labeling the otic lineage from placode to otocyst. the midbrain-hindbrain boundary (mhb) area is also notably labeled. (a0) otocyst and delaminated neuroblast cells on the ventro-anterior region are megfp positive. (b) facs plot shows two main cell populations: mtomato+/megfpà, and mtomatoà/megfp+, which was gated for single-cell sorting. (c) pearson correlation of 382 single cells from otocysts and neuroblasts; 2 cells of the originally collected population of 384 were excluded from the analysis. red indicates high correlation. green represents low correlation. (d) pca of 382 cells projected onto the first two components. (e) genes projected onto the first two principal component loadings. thresholds of 0 (pc1) and à40 (pc2) were applied to determine transcripts along first pc loading. threshold values of +40 (pc1) and 0 (pc2) were used to determine transcripts along second pc loading. (f) binary analysis of different genes whose expression was on or off in each group (a1/a2). shown are the proportion differences of cells between cluster a1 and a2 in descending order from top to bottom. red indicates genes that are overrepresented in cells of the a1 cluster. green represents genes that are expressed in relatively more cells in cluster a2. see also figures s1–s4 and tables s1 and s2e.']. Reference sentences:[using ﬂuorescence-activated figure 1.cell 157 964–978 may 8 2014 ª2014 elsevier inc. 965 (legend on next page) 966 cell 157 964–978 may 8 2014 ª2014 elsevier inc. cell sorting (facs) we collected 384 individual membrane- egfp(+)/membrane-tdtomato(–) cells from the otocyst and the immediate neighboring tissue of embryonic day 10.5 (e10.5) embryos (figure 1b and figure s1 available online).correlations revealed two distinct clusters of cells which we termed a1 (consisting of 110 cells) and a2 (consisting of 272 cells) (figure 1c).when we projected the first two principal component loadings for all 92 transcripts we were able to categorize two distinguishing cohorts of genes based on high-differential loadings between pc1 and pc2 (figure 1e).further- more comparison of the relative proportion of cells expressing individual genes reveals that neuroblast-associated transcripts are linked with cells belonging to a1 clearly distinguishing these cells from the a2 cluster (figure 1f).]
Patterns related to correlation between gene expressions in single cells from otocysts and neuroblasts were shown in the figure.

Text 17
10.1073/pnas.1402030111
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 5. variation in gene expression within and between mescs and mefs. (a) the cv in genes expressed in a group of 12 single mescs (gray dots) and a group of 6 mescs and 6 mefs (red dots) plotted against mean expression. genes in the heterogeneous population exhibiting a cv greater than 3 sds above the mean cv of 12 mescs were considered to show high variability and are colored turquoise (dataset s1). (b) unsupervised hierarchical clustering of six mescs and six mefs based on the expression levels of 689 genes found to show high variation between the two cell types in a. (c) unsupervised hierarchical clustering of six mescs and six mefs based on expression levels of 38 long noncoding rnas that showed high variability between the two cell types (fig s6c and dataset s1). (d) histogram of expression levels of dppa3 in 44 single mesc libraries. (e) correlation of cv between genes expressed with rpkm > 50 in six mef cells and six typical mescs (labeled purple in fig s4c). the percentages represent the fraction of genes with higher cv among mef cells than mescs (blue) and lower cv among mef cells than mescs (red). similar plots with various sets of six mescs are shown in fig s7.']. Reference sentences:[we grouped 6 mef cells with 6 typical mescs and calculated the cv for detected genes across all 12 cells as a function of mean expression (fig 5a).unsupervised hierar- chical clustering of 12 cells in the heterogeneous group was per- formed using the expression levels of these 689 variable genes (fig 5b si materials and methods and dataset s1).unsupervised clustering of 12 cells in the heterogeneous population and their expression levels of these long noncoding rnas accurately resolved the two cell types as well (fig 5c).some of these genes like dppa3 have broad or bimodal expression distributions at the single-cell level with over 1000-fold change in expression levels (fig 5d and fig s5c).the clustering diagram in fig 5b reveals noticeable heteroge- neity between the six mef cells as well.among these roughly 1000 genes 64% exhibited higher variation in six mef cells on average compared with sets of six mescs (fig 5e and fig s7).in this report we addressed these limitations with a micro- fluidic platform coupled with high-throughput sequencing for 0 0.5 1.0 1.5 .2.0 2.5 2.5 2.0 1.5 1.0 0.5 0 0 1 2 3 4 5 3.5 3.0 2.5 2.0 1.5 1.0 0.5 0.0 homogeneous heterogeneous mean cv (mesc) mean cv (mef) mean expression (log10(rpkm)) coefficient of variation (σ/μ) a c b d 64% 36% 0 0.1 1.0 10 100 0 10 20 30 rpkm dppa3 n e mef6 mef5 mef2 mef3 mef4 mef1 mesc24 mesc23 mesc28 mesc27 mesc26 mesc25 −2 0 2 mef3 mef4 mef5 mef6 mef1 mef2 mesc27 mesc24 mesc23 mesc28 mesc26 mesc25 −2 0 2 row z-score row z-score fig 5.]
Summary: Patterns of correlation in gene expression variability between different cell types, highlighted by hierarchical clustering and CV analysis.

Text 18
10.1126/science.1254257
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 1. intratumoral glioblastoma heterogeneity quantified by single-cell rna-seq. (a) workflow depicts rapid dissociation and isolation of glioblastoma cells from primary tumors for generating single-cell and bulk rna-seq profiles and deriving glioblastoma culture models. (b) clustering of cnv profiles inferred from rnaseq data for all single cells and a normal brain sample. clusters (dendrogram) primarily reflect tumor-specific cnv [colored bar coded as in (d)]. topmost cluster (red, arrow) contains the normal brain sample and 10 single cells, 9 of which correlate with normal oligodendrocyte expression profiles and 1 with normal monocytes (“oligo” and “mono,” black and white heatmap). (c) heatmap of cnv signal normalized against the “normal” cluster defined in (b) shows cnv changes by chromosome (columns) for individual cells (rows). all cells outside the normal cluster exhibit chromosome 7 gain (red) and chromosome 10 loss (blue), which are characteristic of glioblastoma. (d) multidimensional scaling illustrates the relative similarity between all 420 single tumor cells and population controls. the distance between any two cells reflects the similarity of their expression profiles. cells group by tumor (color code), but each tumor also contains outliers that are more similar to cells in other tumors. (e) rna-seq read densities (vertical scale of 10) over surface receptor genes are depicted for individual cells (rows) from mgh30. cell-to-cell variability suggests a mosaic pattern of receptor expression, in contrast to constitutively expressed gapdh.']. Reference sentences:[to analyze intra- tumoral heterogeneity systematically we isolated individual cells from five freshly resected and dissociated human glioblastomas and generated single-cell full-length transcriptomes using smart-seq (96 to 192 cells per tumor total 672 cells; fig 1a).hierarchical clustering of all single cells and normal brain samples identified seven groups with concordant cnv profiles (fig 1b).notably all nine of these expression outliers clustered with the normal brain in the cnv analysis (fig 1b).the one additional “nor- mal” cell inferred from this cnv cluster correlated with a monocytic expression signature (26) (fig 1b).to analyze global transcriptional interrelationships we used multi- dimensional scaling to represent the degree of similarity among the cells in the data set (fig 1d) (24).we found mosaic expression for egfr pdgfra pdgfa fgfr1 fgf1 notch2 jag1 and other surface receptors and ligands in pathways pertinent to glioblastoma (fig 1e and fig s6 and s7).moreover several cells lack egfr but express other tyrosine kinase receptors suggesting potential alternative pathways for proliferative signaling (fig 1e and fig s7).moreover direct examination of additional cells scoring for the complement/immune signature confirmed chromosomal aberrations characteristic of glioblas- toma (fig 1c).]
Patterns related to correlation between cnv profiles and expression profiles in single glioblastoma cells.

Text 19
10.1038/nbt.2967
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 13 and supplementary table 5). indeed, in situ hybridization revealed mosaic expression of egr1 and fos in the ventricular zone (fig 4a–d). the levels of egr1 and fos were highly correlated across single radial glial cells, and the corresponding proteins were coexpressed in a subset of radial glia, suggesting that these genes could be transcribed in response to the same signaling pathway (fig 4e,h and supplementary fig 14). multiple signaling pathways, including fgf, notch and wnt, orchestrate radial glia development, but asynchronous activation of these signaling pathways in neighboring cells makes identifying downstream effector genes challenging16,17. coordinated patterns of pathway activation in other tissues have facilitated the identification of candidate downstream effector genes,']. Reference sentences:[]
Correlated gene expression patterns in single radial glial cells suggest common signaling pathway activation.

Text 20
10.1101/gr.171645.113
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 4. requirement for aire reflects known aire deficiency pathologies. (a) the median expression level (fpkm) of sets of genes restricted in expression to single physiological samples (excluding the thymus) of the gnf geneatlas (based on dynamic step criteria; see methods; supplemental fig. 6) (gene numbers indicated in parentheses) for each tec population. gene sets are sorted by the fold change in median expression level between mature aire-positive and mature aire-ko mtec (accompanying bar chart). in both a and b, gene sets representing organs affected by aire deficiency in aps-1 (‘‘hs’’) and the corresponding mouse model (‘‘mm’’) are indicated. (b) the fraction of the same sets of genes that are detectable (<5% local fdr) in each tec population (see methods; supplemental fig 3); gene sets are sorted by the increase in the fraction of these genes detected in mature aire-positive mtec compared to aire-ko tec. (c ) relative expression of known aps-1 autoantigens in mature aire-positive wild-type and knockout tec (shikama et al. 2009). induction by aire expression is significantly negatively correlated with the transcriptional level of these genes in mature aire-ko mtec.']. Reference sentences:[an alter- native differential expression approach based on count data yielded similar con- clusions (supplemental fig 4ab; sup- plemental table 3).above an fpkm threshold of 0.13 we found 3378 tras to be commonly expressed by ctec mature aire-negative mtec and mature aire-positive mtec 4623 tras to be expressed by both aire-negative and aire-positive mature mtec and 5970 tras to be expressed in mature aire-positive mtec (supple- mental fig 4d).2013) showed especially strong dependence on aire expression (denoted hs and mm respectively) (fig 4ab).while the parathyroid is not represented in the gnf geneatlas 14 genes restricted to the adrenal gland gnf geneatlas sample showed a relatively high requirement for aire expression for transcription in mtec (fig 4b).genes with transcripts restricted to the reproductive system were also among those displaying the highest degree of dependency on aire expres- sion (fig 4b).we also observed tissues whose antigens were largely induced by aire expression but that have thus far not been identified as targets of aps-1-related pa- thologies (fig 4ab) such as several female reproductive system tissues (perheentupa 2006).only half of the mouse orthologs of known aps-1-relevant autoantigens showed a clear dependence on aire expression with dependency being largely predicted by the level of ortholog tran- scription in aire-ko mtec (fig 4c).notably however the spec- trum of tissues represented by the aps-1 autoantigens was largely recapitulated among the affected mouse orthologs which together with the broader analyses (fig 4ab) indicate a strongly conserved role for aire between these two species.numbers of genes detected per cell are likely underestimates due to the limited detection sensi- tivity of lowly expressed genes at the single-cell level (assessed in figure 4.the transcriptomes of aire-positive and -negative mature mtec are except for genes regulated by aire expression remarkably similar (supplemental fig 4a 8d).]
Patterns of gene expression related to correlation with aire expression levels in different tec populations, reflecting known aire deficiency pathologies.

Text 21
10.1101/gr.171645.113
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 2. rna-seq analysis reveals the full extent of pge in tec. (a) the number of genes detected in each facs sorted tec population at a local fdr of 5% (see methods; supplemental fig 3; supplemental table 2) as a function of read depth (pooled replicates) indicates that read depth was not limiting for most of the tec populations. (b) the number of genes detected in the tec populations at different fpkm thresholds. the left-hand start of the solid lines indicates the expression level that corresponds to a local fdr of 5% for a given tec population (see also supplemental fig 3c). the vertical blue dashed line indicates the fpkm at which genes can be reliably detected in all tec types (numbers of genes detected at this threshold are shown in inset). (c ) selected go categories enriched in genes not detected in any tec population reveal a striking enrichment for odorant receptors (supplemental fig 5). (cl) cellular location; (bp) biological process; (mf) molecular function. (d) hierarchical clustering of the expression levels of all protein-coding genes in the tec populations reveals three distinct strata of pge. the color key to the left of the heatmap indicates the tissue specificity of genes in the gnf geneatlas according to the dynamic step method (methods; supplemental fig 6). (e) hierarchical clustering of the tec populations by gene expression correlation distance reveals four significant clusters (red asterisks, p > 0.95).']. Reference sentences:[we inspected residual tran- scription from the modified aire locus and confirmed it to be largely limited to the unmodified 59 utr (supplemental fig 2b).2013) protein-coding genes (fig 2a; supplemental table 2).notably the expression of many genes was much stronger in mtec than in ctec (fig 2b).across a range of fpkm thresholds the tec subtypes clearly separated into three groups based on the numbers of genes they expressed: (i) mature mtec expressing aire (ii) immature mtec and mature mtec lacking aire expression and (iii) ctec (fig 2b).at an fpkm threshold of 0.13 at which genes can be reliably detected in all of the tec populations assayed (dashed blue line fig 2b) the mature aire-positive mtec population expressed 87% (19293) of ensembl protein-coding genes.gene ontology (go) analysis revealed a strong enrich- ment of odorant receptors among these genes (fig 2c; supplemental fig 5) and inspection revealed them to be comprised largely of olfactory receptors (882 genes 49%) vomeronasal receptors (276 genes 15%) and genes of unknown function (398 22%) that are annotated as riken clones or unannotated ensembl gene models (a set expected to contain pseu- dogenes and noncoding rnas wrongly assigned as encoding proteins).based on the hierarchical clustering of gene expression correlation we found the tec populations to fall into four significant clusters comprised of ctec immature mtec mature mtec lacking aire expression and mature aire-expressing mtec (fig 2e).the tec figure 2.while we detect similar numbers of expressed genes in ctec and in aire-negative mtec (fig 2b) the promiscuous expression of tissue-specific antigens is notably weaker in the ctec population (fig 2d 4a) which may impact on the efficiency of ctec-mediated selection.identification of tissue-restricted genes tissue-restricted genes (fig 2d 3d 5a–e 6a–d 7ac; supple- mental table 2) were identified as described above and in the supplemental methods.]
Patterns of gene expression correlation in different single-cell populations reveal distinct clusters related to tissue specificity.

Text 22
10.1101/gr.171645.113
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 3. aire expression positively regulates a large set of tissue-restricted genes. (a) genes differentially expressed between mature aire-positive mtec and mature aire-ko mtec (<5% fdr, more than twofold). a set of 474 housekeeping genes (de jonge et al. 2007) showed little change in expression, indicating the absence of a systematic bias (yellow points). (b) at the population level, aire expression elevates target gene transcription to a median fpkm of 1. (c ) aire expression differentially up-regulates individual target genes. each gray vertical line represents the change in fpkm of a single gene between mature aire-ko mtec and mature aire-positive mtec. genes are ordered by increasing expression in mature aire-ko mtec on the x-axis, being either dependent on or enhanced by aire expression. the red line represents the moving average of fpkm in mature aire-positive mtec. (d) genes induced by aire expression are tissue-restricted in transcription. tissue-restricted genes were identified from the gnf geneatlas using the dynamic step method (methods; supplemental fig 6). (e) degree of tissue restriction is positively correlated with the requirement for aire expression. the fraction of genes requiring aire expression for detection was assessed for sets of genes restricted in expression to all possible branches, nodes, and leafs of the gnf geneatlas sample clustering (supplemental fig 6a). only gene sets with at least 10 members are shown. the red dot indicates 1586 genes restricted in expression to testis, a tissue with a transcriptome of abnormally high complexity (ramsko€ld et al. 2009) that is known to express aire and to undertake pge (schaller et al. 2008).']. Reference sentences:[employing a novel local false discovery rate (fdr) approach that enables a per-gene estimate of expression probability (supplemental fig 3) we discovered that the assayed ctec and mtec populations expressed 84% and 89% respectively of ensembl (flicek et al.(a) the number of genes detected in each facs sorted tec population at a local fdr of 5% (see methods; supplemental fig 3; supplemental table 2) as a function of read depth (pooled replicates) indicates that read depth was not limiting for most of the tec populations.the left-hand start of the solid lines indicates the expression level that corresponds to a local fdr of 5% for a given tec population (see also supplemental fig 3c).aire expression positively regulated (induced) 3980 ensembl protein-coding genes but negatively regulated only 180 genes (more than twofold 5% fdr) (fig 3a; supplemental table 3).of the genes up-regulated by aire expression 594 (15%) were entirely dependent on aire expression (i.e. their transcripts were not detected in aire-ko mtec) whereas aire expression elevated the transcription of 3386 genes (85%) (fig 3c).given the diverse clinical presentation of aps-1 we next ex- amined the tissue specificity of genes regulated by aire expression figure 3.furthermore analysis of exclusive sets of genes with varying de- grees of expression breadth across the gnf geneatlas uncovered a positive relationship between the fraction of genes in a set re- quiring aire expression for detection and the set’s tissue-expression specificity (r = 0.47 p = 1.4 3 10=5) (fig 3e).in individual mature mtec we detected the transcription of an average of 5262 genes including 0–27 aire expression-dependent (mean = 3) 46–322 (mean = 144) aire ex- pression enhanced and 241–969 (mean = 581) aire expression independent tra (fig 3c 7a).(b) the fraction of the same sets of genes that are detectable (<5% local fdr) in each tec population (see methods; supplemental fig 3); gene sets are sorted by the increase in the fraction of these genes detected in mature aire-positive mtec compared to aire-ko tec.(a) single mature mtec tend to express few genes that are dependent on or enhanced by aire expression (as defined in fig 3c).2010) denoted ‘‘cuffdiff fpkm’’ or (ii) directly from read counts denoted ‘‘fpkm’’ with multimapping reads being assigned a fractional count value according to their number of alignment locations (for comparison see supplemental fig 3b; sims et al.separately we identified nonoverlapping sets of genes showing restricted expression in all leafs and nodes of the gnf geneatlas sample clustering (supplemental fig 6a) using the same dynamic step criteria (fig 3e 4ab).]
Patterns related to correlation: Aire expression positively regulates tissue-restricted gene expression, with a positive correlation between tissue specificity and the requirement for Aire expression.

Text 23
10.1038/nature13920
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 2 | expression states of variable genes are coupled together and persist over multiple cell divisions. a, slowly fluctuating genes show a high degree of intercolony variability. b, expression of the pluripotency regulator esrrb within individual colonies. c, intra- and inter-colony variability in expression for selected pluripotency and lineage regulators. average transcript number and standard deviation within colonies are indicated. d, time-lapse imaging of colony formation from single cells, and nr0b1 and oct4 expression within these colonies. e, relative oct4 and esrrb protein levels within mescs cultured in serum1lif. groups of high and low esrrb cells are indicated. f, correlation of pluripotency regulator and polycomb target gene expression between individual cells. pcg, polycomb-group protein. g, dependence of neurod1 expression on the level of sox2 and nr0b1 within individual cells. dashed lines indicate high and low expression states, and p values for differences between states were calculated using the kolmogorov–smirnov test. scale bars: b, d, 40 mm; e, 0.01 cm.']. Reference sentences:[most cells (92%) grouped together by principalcomponentandclusteranalysiswhile14cells(8%)werechar- acterized by reduced expression of fluctuating pluripotency regulators which may indicate a distinct poised state (extended data fig 2 and supplementary information).to determine the stability of expression states over rounds of cell divisionweseededindividualmescsontocultureplatesallowedthem toformcoloniesover3–4daysandquantifiedthelevelofinter-andintra- colony variability for selected genes using smfish (fig 2a).individual colonies showed distinct expression states for esrrb with some locked into a high level some locked into a low level and others that displayed mixed expression suggesting a sudden switching between high and low states during the process of colony formation (fig 2b).other pluripo- tency regulators including nanog nr0b1 (also called dax1) and myc aswellaslineageregulatorsand polycombtargetsneurod1otx2olig2 and pax6alsoexhibited highinter-colonyvariability suggestiveofslow fluctuations in expression states (fig 2c).all rights reserved in growth rate and bimodal nr0b1 expression (fig 2d) validating our approach and highlighting the pronounced variability and persistence of growth rate morphology and expression state of mescs grown in serum plus lif (serum1lif mescs).this expressionstate persistence extended tothe protein level (fig 2e and extended datafig.clustering of pluripotency regulators revealed that they partitioned into several co-expressed modules with some modules positively cor- related with polycomb target expression and others negatively corre- lated (fig 2f and extended data fig 5).notably the 8% of cells sepa- rated from the main population by principal component analysis tended to be in low expression states for nr0b1 nanog and zfp42 and showed higher polycomb target gene expression than did the majority of cells (extended data fig 2 and 5) suggesting that the rna-seq-detected correlations reflect biologically meaningful states in which pluripo- tency factor expression influences the probability of lineage regulator expression.the pearson correlation coefficient was used to quantify gene expression correlation in fig 2f.for the live cell tracking experiments shown in fig 2d cells were plated and cultured as described above except that cells were stained with 1 mm celltrace calcein am red-orange (life technologies) allowed tosettlefor2 handimagedonazeissaxioobserverfluorescencemicroscopebefore returning to the incubator.for the data shown in fig 2e and extended data fig 5b c images were acquired using standard detectors and voltage and gain settings were maintained at a constant level for each set of images acquired for each pair of transcription factors.p values for significance of differences between high and low states shown in fig 2g were calculated using the kolmogorov–smirnov test.for fig 2b cell colony numbers: 258 cells for the colony on the left in the high expression state 70 cells for the colony in the middle in the low expression state and 98 cells for the colony on the right in the mixed expression state.these three colonies are part of the 10 colonies examined for the overall esrrb population dis- tribution in serum1lif shown in figs 1b and 2c.fig 2c oct4 and dazl: 5 colonies 318 cells; sox2 and neurod1: 5 colonies 551 cells; nanog and otx2: 5 colonies 151 cells; esrrb: 10 colonies 1226 cells; lin28a: 5 colonies 472 cells; nr0b1: 8 colonies 849 cells; myc 8 colonies 867 cells; olig2 10 colonies 1097 cells; nkx2-9: 5 colonies 524 cells; and pax6: 5 colonies 417 cells.nanog: serum1lif (5 colonies 151 cells (same data as in fig 2c)) 2i1lif (5 col- onies 398 cells) dgcr82/2 (5 colonies 145 cells).nr0b1: serum1lif (8 colonies 849 cells (same data as in fig 2c)) 2i1lif (5 colonies 429 cells) dgcr82/2 (5 col- onies 283 cells).otx2: serum1lif (5 colonies 151 cells (same data as in fig 2c)) 2i1lif(5colonies 398cells)dgcr82/2(5colonies144cells).all rights reserved extended data figure 2 | examination of mescs cultured in serum1lif for the presence of distinct subpopulations.‘normal’ indicates the majority of cells coloured as grey dots in extended data fig 2b; ‘outliers’ indicates the distinct set of 14 cells coloured blue in extended data fig 2b.e single-cell rna-seq relationships for gene pairs shown in fig 2g.dashed lines indicate divisions between high and low states for box plot shown in fig 2g.]
Patterns of gene expression correlation within and between individual cells, indicating stable expression states and variability in pluripotency and lineage regulators.

Text 24
10.1038/nature13920
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 4 | dgcr82/2 mescs show evidence of ground-state self-renewal. a, correlation between single-cell rna-seq gene expression changes in different conditions. b, distances between individual cells for pluripotency regulators shown in panel c. c, heat map of single-cell rna-seq data for selected pluripotency regulators. d, e, single-molecule fish (d) and quantitative immunofluorescence (e) showing a shift towards the high']. Reference sentences:[stable and variable regulators were also identified in neural precursor cells derived from mescs (supplementary infor- mation supplementary table 4 and extended data fig 4) suggesting thatthis may bea generalfeature ofprogenitor cell regulatory networks.all rights reserved certain polycomb target genes were expressed in some cells at levels comparable to pluripotency regulators up to 60 transcripts per cell despite the presence of the repressive h3k27me3 (trimethylation of lysine 27 on histone h3) chromatin mark associated with polycomb activity (fig 1d extended data fig 4 and supplementary table 5).gene expression changes between serum1lif and 2i1lif mescs werehighlycorrelatedwithchangesbetweenserum1lifanddgcr82/2 mescs (fig 4a and extended data fig 7).as a population 2i1lif mescsshowedreducedheterogeneityascomparedtoserum1lifmescs inkeepingwiththenotionthatinhibitingerkandgsk3signallingdrives mouse pscs into a low-noise ground state202837 (fig 4b and extended data fig 7).expression was confirmed by smfish and quantitative immunofluor- escence and was recapitulated in an independent mesc line (fig 4d e and extended data fig 7).both culture in 2i1lif and re- moval of mature mirnas resulted in a reduction of h3k27me3 at pro- moters (fig 4f g extended data fig 8 and supplementary table 5).for the data shown in fig 4e and extended data fig 5d images were ac- quiredusinghyddetectorsinphotoncountingmode.z-intervalswerespaced1 mm apart and 10 slices were taken centred around the area of maximum intensity for each region imaged.for fig 4d serum1lif: 1226 cells from 10 colonies (same data as in figs 1b and 2c); 2i1lif: 557 cells from 5 colonies; dgcr82/2: 187 cells from 5 colonies.fig 4e serum1lif: 901 cells; 2i1lif: 1648 cells; dgcr82/2: 248 cells.all rights reserved extended data figure 4 | expression of polycomb target genes in escs and neural precursor cells (npcs).a changes in expression of the pluripotency regulators shown in fig 4c going from serum1lif to 2i1lif culture (x axis) or between wild-type and dgcr82/2 cells cultured in serum1lif (y axis) as measured by single-cell rna-seq.unlike h3k27me3 levels of these three factors do not show a strong decrease at polycomb target genes under 2i1lif conditions and in dgcr82/2 mescs (compare to fig 4f).]
Summary: Correlation between gene expression changes in different conditions, distances between cells for pluripotency regulators, and a shift towards high expression levels.

Text 25
10.1126/science.1258367
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 5. dissecting subpopulations of cd8+ tcells. clustering of cytoseq data defines two major groups of cd8+ cells. one group expresses genes shared by central memory/naïve cells, and the other group expresses genes shared by effector memory/effector cells. shown here is data of donor 2’s unstimulated sample. (a) heat map showing correlation between each pair of cells. (b) heat map showing the level of expression of each gene in each cell. cells and genes are ordered by bidirectional hierarchical clustering.']. Reference sentences:[the rest of the samples showed two main groups of cells (fig 5 and fig s12 and 13).]
Summary: Correlation patterns between gene expressions in two distinct cell groups of CD8+ T cells are shown in a heatmap.

Text 26
10.1126/science.1258367
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 3. simultaneous identification of major cell types in a human pbmc sample (632 cells) by pca analysis assayed by cytoseq. (a) cells with highly correlated expression profile are coded with similar color. (b to i) expression of gapdh and a representative gene of each major cell type by each cell. color indicates natural log of the number of unique transcript molecules observed per cell. fig s4 shows results of 17 additional genes with clear segregation on the three-dimensional (3d) pc plot.']. Reference sentences:[we analyzed the dig- ital gene expression profile of 632 pbmcs (fig 3 and fig s5).]
Summary: Correlated expression profiles of major cell types in a human PBMC sample were identified using PCA analysis, showing segregation of gene expressions.

Text 27
10.1093/nar/gkv134
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 4. comparison of the performance of the sc3-seq with that of other single-cell rna-seq methods. (a) scatter-plot analysis of the correlation between the expression level and the transcript length, detected by the sc3-seq [dilution samples from 100 ng (replicate 1, ms01t01), 10 ng (replicate 1, ms01t05) and 10 pg (replicate 1, ms01t17) of esc total rnas, and a single mouse embryonic cell (ms04t18) and a single human ipsc (ms04t66)], the smart-seq2 [dilution samples from 1 ng (smart-seq2 1ng, hek rep1) and 10 pg (smart-seq2 10 pg, hek rep1) of hek293 total rnas, and a single mouse embryonic fibroblast (smart-seq2 mef, rep 1)] (13), the single-cell rna-seq by yan et al. [a single human esc (yan hesc 1)] (34), and a fulllength rna-seq [ohta mesc and ohta mef (33)]. the expression levels by the sc3-seq are shown as log2 rpm, whereas those by the other methods are shown as log2 fpkm. the histogram on the right of each scatter plot indicates the distribution of gene-expression levels of transcripts with different length ranges (color code indicated). (b) distributions of the mapped reads around the 3-prime ends of the transcripts by the three single-cell rna-seq methodologies. (c) distributions of the mapped reads within the whole transcripts of different length ranges (color code indicated) by the three singlecell rna-seq methodologies. (d) analysis for saturation of detection [gene-expression levels the top 6555th and 6217th genes for mice and humans, respectively (1/4 of all the annotated transcripts for mice and humans), ∼log2 rpm 3.69 ± 0.05 (sc3-seq), ∼log2 fpkm 2.21 ± 1.28 (yan et al.) and ∼log2 fpkm 2.92 ± 0.27 (picelli et al.), fold changes of gene expression levels 2 in comparison to those determined by the full sequence reads [supplementary table s1 or (13,34)] for all (top) and short (<1 kb, 913 and 832 genes for mice and humans, respectively) transcripts by the three single-cell rna-seq methodologies. see supplementary figure s4c for transcripts <750 bp and <500 bp.']. Reference sentences:[the expression data by the sc3- seq were analyzed using log2 (rpm+1) as the expression value except in figure 4 and supplementary figure s4a and b.in figure 4 the rpm/fpkm values less than 0.01 were set as 0.01 for the calculation of correlation coeffi- cients (133334).≤ 2] number of mapped reads (mega reads) all < 1.0 kb distance from tts (bases) transcript 3’ 5’ transcript 3’ 5’ sc3-seq_10pg (16) smart-seq2_10 pg (2) yan_hesc (26) sc3-seq_10pg (16) smart-seq2_10 pg (2) yan_hesc (26) 0 0.5 1.5 2.0 1.0 smart-seq2_10 pg (2) yan_hesc (26) 100 ng (2) 10 ng (2) 1 ng (4) 100 pg (8) 10 pg (16) 120 % 100 % 80 % 60 % 40 % 20 % 0 % 120 % 100 % 80 % 60 % 40 % 20 % 0 % transcript length (kb) frequency (%) 0 8 6 4 2 10 0 5 10 15 20 transcript length (kb) frequency (%) 0 8 6 4 2 10 0 5 10 15 20 transcript length (kb) frequency (%) 0 8 6 4 2 10 0 5 10 15 20 transcript length (kb) frequency (%) 0 8 6 4 2 10 0 5 10 15 20 transcript length (kb) frequency (%) 0 8 6 4 2 10 0 5 10 15 20 transcript length (kb) frequency (%) 0 8 6 4 2 10 0 5 10 15 20 figure 4.as shown in figure 4a (panels at bottom right) the control samples exhibited a highly diverse distribution of expression-level ranges irrespective of the transcript lengths and cell types (ohta mescs and ohta mefs) and the av- erage expression levels were similar among all transcript lengths [the modes of expression levels are around log2 fpkm (fragment per kilobase per million mapped reads) = 2].remarkably the distribution of the expression-level ranges as a function of the transcript length detected by the sc3-seq for 100 ng 1 ng and 10 pg of esc rnas as well as for single embryonic or cultured cells (see below) was very similar to that by the control rna-seq (figure 4a pan- els in the upper rows): the genes show relatively constant expression levels irrespective of their transcript length i.e.the modes of ex- pression levels of longer genes were lower and those of shorter genes were higher) (figure 4a panels at bottom two left columns) possibly due to the low efficiency of the synthesis/amplification for longer transcripts which altered the representation of the original gene expression.as shown in figure 4b and c the sc3-seq exhibited a clear sharp peak exclusively at the very 3-prime ends of the transcripts across all the transcript- length ranges as described in part above (figure 1).ends especially for longer transcripts (figure 4c).in accordance with these findings we found that whereas the sc3-seq requires ∼0.2 m of mapped reads for saturation of the correct detection of short (<1 kb) transcripts [gene- expression levels ≧the top 6555th gene (the number corre- sponding to 1/4 of all the annotated transcripts in mice) ∼log2 rpm ≧ 3.69 ± 0.05 fold changes of gene expres- sion levels ≦ 2 in comparison to those determined by the full sequence reads (supplementary table s1)] the other two methods require more than ∼2 m of mapped reads for saturation of the correct detection of such transcripts [<1 kb gene-expression levels ≧the top 6555th and 6217th gene (the number corresponding to 1/4 of all the annotated tran- scripts in mice and humans respectively) ∼log2 fpkm ≧ 2.92 ± 0.27 (13) or 2.21 ± 0.05 (34) fold changes of gene expression levels ≦ 2 in comparison to those determined by the full sequence reads (1334)] (figure 4d and supple- mentary figure s4c).compared to other single- cell rna-seq methods that aim to generate amplify and read full-length cdnas the sc3-seq exhibits a superior quantitative performance in that it does not underestimate the expression levels of relatively longer transcripts (figure 4a) and it detects much larger numbers of transcripts with smaller sequence depth (figure 4d).]
Correlation patterns between gene expression levels and transcript length in single cells are consistent across different methods, with distinct peaks at the 3-prime ends of transcripts.

Text 28
10.1016/j.cell.2015.04.044
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 7. heterogeneity in differentiating es cells (a) changes in global population structure after lif withdrawal seen by hierarchically clustering cell-cell correlations over highly variable genes. (b and c) average (b) and distribution (c) of gene expression after lif withdrawal; violin plots in (c) indicate the fraction of cells expressing a given number of counts; points show top 5% of cells. error bars = sem. (d and e) first two pcs of 3,034 cells showing asynchrony in differentiation. (f) epiblast and pren cell fractions as a function of time. error bars = sem. (g) tsne maps of differentiating es cells, and of genes (right) reveal putative population markers (see also figure s7 and table s4). (h) intrinsic dimensionality of gene expression variability in es cells and following lif withdrawal, showing a smaller ﬂuctuation sub-space during differentiation. the pure rna control lacks correlations and displays a maximal ﬂuctuation sub-space.']. Reference sentences:[cell 161 1187–1201 may 21 2015 ª2015 elsevier inc. 1195 (figure 7c).this trend was supported by a pca analysis of cells from all time points (figure 7d; see supplemental experimental procedures for gene selection and normalization) showing that after 7 days 5% (n = 799) of cells overlapped with the es cell pop- ulation.the greatesttemporalheterogeneity wasevidentat4 days post-lif with cells spread broadly along the firstprincipal compo- nent between the es cell and differentiating state.1196 cell 161 1187–1201 may 21 2015 ª2015 elsevier inc. a −5 0 5 10 15 −5 0 5 10 pc 1 pc 2 mes cells day 2 early day 2 late day 4 day 7 −0.1 0 0.1 0.2 −0.2 −0.1 0 0.1 0.2 pc 1 loading pc 2 loading ccnd3 dppa5a eif2s2 esrrb fam25c mt1/2 mylpf nanog nlrp1a pbld1 pou5f1 slc29a1 sox2 tdgf1 tdh trim28 zfp42 actb actg1 krt8 krt18 actn1 anxa2 lgals1 fxyd6 wnk1 s100a6 gsn lrrc58 myl12a eef2 faueno1/1b ftl1 hsp90ab1 pkm ptma tpt1 col4a2 gm20172fam229b mid1ip1 cd44 d3ertd254e lama1 ncl hsp90aa1 tmsb10 eif5a tagln/2 myl6 cnn2 tpm1 dstn wbp5 csrp1 sparc tubb6 cald1 s100a11 s100a10 eef1a1 gapdh uba52 prdx1 eif4a1 ldha fth1 hspa8 tubb5 0 2 4 7 0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 time post−lif fraction pren (%) 0 20 40 60 80 100 fraction epiblast (%) pren epi-hi undiff (oct4/sox2+) rhox6/rhox9+ h19 zscan4+ day 4 undiff (oct4/sox2+) rhox6/rhox9+ h19 pren epi-hi (krt+) es 2d cell-cell correlation −0.2 −0.1 0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 4d 7d b c e d f day 7 g h 0 20 40 60 80 1 2 3 4 5 dimensionality k−l divergence mes cells 7 days lif pure rna cldn4/6 pren epiblast h19/rhox6/9 zscan4 fbxo15 tcstv1/3 pou5f1 tdgf1 dnmt3l sox2 mt1/2/3 nanog ifitm1 igfbp2 esrrb gapdh prdx1/6eno1 nlrp1a zfp42 dppa5a klf4 klf2 col4a1/2 gata4/6 lama1/b1/c1 cd63 pluripotency tagln actb/g1 dusp9 igf2 h19 peg10 rhox6/9peg3 psap cdkn1c nrk plac1 prdm1 actn1 krt8/18 krt19 s100a6 fem1b mdm2 bbc3 ddit3 0 10 20 zfp42 20 40 60 pou5f1 0 0 10 20 30 sox2 umifm counts (normalized) 0 100 200 300 krt8 0 200 400 actb 0 10 20 ccnd3 0 50 100 gapdh otx2 5 10 0 7 4 2 7 0 4 2 7 0 4 2 7 0 4 2 7 0 4 2 7 0 4 2 7 0 4 2 7 0 4 2 0 time post−lif (days) nanog esrrb ccnd3 pou5f1 zfp42 otx2 sox2 dppa5a expression (mes cells = 1) 0 4 8 30 60 0time post−lif (days)7 2 4 krt8 gapdh actb tpt1 figure 7.cell 161 1187–1201 may 21 2015 ª2015 elsevier inc. 1197 in addition to heterogeneity due to asynchrony we visualized population structure by t-sne and found distinct sub-popula- tions not all of which mapped to known cell types (figure 7g; sub-population markers tabulated in table s4).tsne of genes over the cells revealed clusters of genes marking distinct sub- populations (figure 7g right and figure s7).supporting the refinement hypothesis we found that intrinsic dimensionality decreased after differentiation (figure 7h).]
Summary: Correlation patterns in gene expression during differentiation, with changes in population structure and intrinsic dimensionality.

Text 29
10.15252/msb.20156198
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 4. raw isoform count data is noisy. a example genes. for some genes such as rps27l, higher gene expression appears to result in a proportional increase in both isoforms; for other genes such as skp1a, isoform usage appears not to be correlated at all. the left panels show coverage tracks for pooled data of all esc-2i cells and three sample cells. the right panels show scatter plots summarizing data from all esc-2i cells. up to 0.1 umis xy-jitter was added to reduce overplotting. b global trend. overall, the variance in observed (raw) isoform ratios is lower in more highly expressed genes. the right panel illustrates hypothetical densities for the 10th, 50th and 90th percentile of observed variance and an assumed isoform ratio of 50:50.']. Reference sentences:[for some genes such as the ribosomal protein rps27l observed ratios between major and minor 30 isoform were similar in different cells within the esc-2i population that is a higher expression of the gene was reflected by a proportional increase in the levels of both isoforms (fig 4a upper panel).by contrast for many other genes such as the ubiquitin ligase skp1a observed isoform ratios were highly variable within that population and expression levels of major and minor isoform did not appear correlated (fig 4a lower panel).at the level of the raw data isoform ratios of highly expressed genes appeared less variable than isoform ratios of lowly expressed genes (fig 4b).discussion the major finding from our study is that even in homogeneous populations cells differ in their preferences for 30 rna isoform a b figure 4.]
Correlation between gene expression and isoform usage varies across cells, with higher expression showing proportional isoform increase for some genes.

Text 30
10.1186/s13059-015-0692-3
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 2 intra-tumoral heterogeneity of pdx cells. a scatter plots of the average gene expression of single cells (h358, n = 50; lc-pt-45, n = 34; lc-pt-45-re, n = 43) compared with those of the corresponding bulk cells (~1 × 105 cells). black dotted lines are x = y lines with correlation coefficients (pearson r and spearman r) for linear fit. tpm transcripts per million. b inter-correlation (pearson r) between gene expression in single cells. density plots were constructed with a kernel function fitting over the histograms. c explanatory power (adjusted r-square) of gene expression in various numbers of single cells relative to the bulk cells was determined by multiple regression analysis with randomly selected cell numbers with permutation (×1000). d overlap ratio of expressed single-nucleotide variations (snv) among single cells. density plots were constructed with a kernel function fitting over the histograms. e overlap ratio of expressed snvs of various numbers of single cells relative to that of the bulk cells was calculated with a randomly selected given number of cells with permutation (×1000). for boxplots in (c) and (e), box = interquartile range between the first and the third quartiles, error bars = 10th–90th percentiles']. Reference sentences:[despite the sequencing bias in amplified rnas aver- age gene expression in single cells correlated well with expression in bulk cells for both h358 and pdx cells (fig 2a).the inter-correlation of total gene expression among the 34 individual pdx cells showed wider distri- bution compared with that in the 50 h358 cells (fig 2b) indicating moderately higher transcriptome heterogen- eity.genome biology (2015) 16:127 page 3 of 15 evaluated by multiple regression analysis of different sized pools (n = 5 15 25 34/35 50; randomly selected by permutation × 1000) of single cell transcriptomes to the bulk sample (fig 2c).when averaging increased numbers of cells the single cell data approximated the bulk up to 85 % suggesting that the single cell data are consistent with the bulk data (fig 2c).we repeated the single cell isolation and rna- seq using 43 additional pdx cells and obtained compar- able results that were highly correlated with the first data set (fig 2; figure s3a–f in additional file 5 lc-pt- 45 and lc-pt-45-re).these filtered snvs of individual pdx cells showed relatively heteroge- neous expression compared with those of h358 cells in terms of the lower overlap ratios between single cells (fig 2d).the union of snvs from five pdx cells (ran- domly selected by permutation × 1000) reflected 49 % of the expressed snvs in the whole population whereas those of five h358 cells represented 75 % (fig 2e).statistical analysis of single-cell gene expression linear regression was applied to scatter plots of the av- eraged single cells over the pooled-cell samples in fig 2a with zero intercepts.the inter-correlation distribution between single cells was calculated as pearson’s and spearman’s correlation coefficients and plotted as a density plot with a kernel function fitting over the histo- grams (fig 2b).single-cell samples were randomly chosen with the given number and the adjusted r2 (fig 2c) and the overlap ratio (fig 2e) were determined 1000 times with permutation.]
Correlation patterns in gene expression among single cells and bulk cells, with higher heterogeneity in single-cell transcriptomes.

Text 31
10.1186/s13059-015-0683-4
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 3 cell-type patterns of transcriptome variability. a distribution of expression variability across the transcriptome by cell type. b enrichment of gene ontology categories among variable genes by cell type [49, 52]. crosses indicate significance (fishers exact test bonferroni p < 0.05). category abbreviations: carb. carbohydrate; dev. development; gen. generation; metab. metabolites; prec. precursor; proc. process. c, d partial correlation of f-statistic across species, controlling for gene expression level, for cortical (c) and hippocampal (d) pyramidal neurons. axes are a measure of variation, controlled for gene expression level (see materials and methods for details). rho indicates the partial correlation coefficient. p values are from a two-sided t-test of association. marginal histograms are shown overlaid with a normal curve. e distribution of expression values by cell type for selected genes demonstrating highly variable expression by the outlier-sum statistic in one cell type and as following a normal distribution across cells in another cell type. histograms of genes identified as highly variable in a given cell type are colored green; those of genes identified as normally expressed in a given cell type are colored orange. f contingency table of gene categorization as hypervariable and as fast decaying [34]. sample sizes and abbreviations: brown adipocyte (n = 13, adi); cardiomyocyte (n = 19, car); pyramidal neuron, cortex (mouse n = 19, rat n = 8, pyc); pyramidal neuron, hippocampus (mouse n = 18, rat n = 8, pyh); serotonergic neuron, dorsal raphe (n = 22, ser); all single cells (n = 91, all); 10 pg dilution controls (n = 12, 10p); 50 pg dilution controls (n = 9, 50p); 100 pg dilution controls (n = 9, 100p)']. Reference sentences:[we note that experimental variation (for the dilution controls a combination of dilution and technical variation) depends on the gene- specific levels of rna and the total amount of rna (figure s3g–i in additional file 5; fig 3a).within-cell-type variability with the exception of hippocampal pyramidal neurons all cell types demonstrate significantly greater transcrip- tome variability than that observed across 10 pg dilution controls (wilcoxon rank-sum test p < 0.05; fig 3a).every cell type contains highly variable genes with an f-statistic greater than 10 (fig 3a) indicating the pre- sence of highly variable genes for each cell type.we tested these genes for enrichment of gene ontology molecular func- tion and biological process categories (fig 3b; table s6 in additional file 1).the partial correlation coefficient across species is significant for both cell types examined (two-sided t-test of association p < 10−13; fig 3c–d).each of these genes is classified as highly variable by the outlier-sum statistic in at least one cell type and as following a normal distribution across cells in at least one other cell type (fig 3e; additional file 3).genes identified as variable are significantly more likely to be classified as rapidly decaying than genes with highly consistent expression (chi-square test p < 10−16; fig 3f).]
Patterns of correlation in gene expression variability across different cell types, controlling for gene expression levels.

Text 32
10.1186/s13059-015-0684-3
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 6 a comparison of single-cell median and population-level rna-seq profiles for cells originating from the u87-exclusive lane in experiment 1. each data point was obtained by constructing a median profile from a given number of cells and repeating this 10 times by random sampling with replacement to obtain a median pearson correlation coefficient and error bar (sem). this exercise was repeated for comparison to both the u87 and mcf10a bulk rna-seq profiles to demonstrate better concordance between the u87 single-cell profiles and the u87 bulk profile. b same as (a), but for single-cell profiles in the mcf10a-exlusive lane. c we conducted differential expression analysis to obtain cell type-specific gene sets for the u87 and mcf10a cells based on single-cell profiles from the pure-cell lanes. here, we show a histogram of log-ratio of the coefficients of variation (cvs) for the cell type-specific gene sets between the mixed lane profiles and the profiles from the respective pure lanes. as expected, the heterogeneity given by cv is greater for cells in the mixed lanes than in the cell type-exclusive lanes for the cell type-specific genes']. Reference sentences:[genome biology (2015) 16:120 page 7 of 16 numbers of individual cells after normalizing by the total number of molecules detected in each cell (fig 6a b).we conducted this analysis on single-cell profiles origin- ating from the u87-exclusive and mcf10a-exclusive lanes in experiment 1 randomly sampling the complete sets of profiles 10 times without replacement for each point in the curves shown in fig 6a and b.this analysis shows that the single-cell medians constructed from u87 single-cell profiles correlate better with the bulk u87 rna-seq profile than with the bulk mcf10a rna- seq profile (fig 6a) and vice versa (fig 6b).figure 6c shows the log-ratio of the coefficients of variation (cvs) for each of these two genes sets between the mixed lane profiles and the profiles from the respective pure lanes.we generated single-cell median profiles from different numbers of randomly selected single-cell profiles and repeated this random sampling 10 times without replacement for each data point in fig 6a and b.]
Summary: Correlation between single-cell profiles and bulk profiles, with higher concordance within cell type-specific gene sets.

Text 33
10.1186/1471-2164-15-1129
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 4 comparison of rna-seq and microarray data from single cells. (a) a comparison of rna-seq and affymetrix array data generated from the same amplified single cell samples. the overall correlation (pearson) of the mcf7/mcf10a ratio between rna-seq and affymetrix array data sets for the 157 genes examined was 0.95. (b) venn diagrams showing overlaps of differentially expressed genes identified by rna-seq and affymetrix array analysis (fc > 2, fdr < 0.05 for both data sets) highlighting the larger number of de genes identified in the rna-seq data set. (c) a comparison of single cell rna-seq data and10 μg rna affymetrix array data showing the expression profiles of the top 30 differentially expressed genes identified by rna-seq or 10 μg rna affymetrix array data (all data fc > 2, fdr threshold 0.05). heat map colour scheme for (a) and (c) as described in figure 2b.']. Reference sentences:[comparison of these 157 genes showed consistent patterns of differential expression across both platforms with an overall pearson correlation between the rna-seq and array data of 0.92 (figure 4a).from this analysis more differentially expressed genes were identified from the rna-seq data set than the affymetrix array data with the majority of genes identified in the array data set also identified in the rna-seq data (figure 4b).we then performed the complementary analysis by identifying the 30 most differentially expressed genes in the 10 μg reference data and compared their expression in the in the single cell rna-seq data (figure 4c).a highly significant correlation (pearson 0.90) was identified be- tween all 60 genes with similar expression patterns seen in the single cell rna-seq and the 10 μg reference data (figure 4c).a comparison of genes identified by affymetrix arrays or rna-seq analysis of the same single cell ampli- fied cdna revealed similar patterns of expression (figure 4a) demonstrating platform independence.inter- estingly substantially more differentially expressed genes were identified by rna-seq analysis than with the affymetrix microarrays (figure 4b).the additional differentially expressed genes identified in the rna-seq analysis were shown to be true biological variation between the cell lines by comparing the single cell rna-seq data to the 10 μg reference data (figure 4c) with differentially expressed genes identified within these data sets showing significant correlation (pearson correlation 0.89).]
Summary: Consistent differential gene expression patterns between RNA-seq and microarray data, with more genes identified in RNA-seq. High correlation between single-cell RNA-seq and reference data.

Text 34
10.1186/1471-2164-15-1129
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 1 transcriptional profiling of rna-amplified mcf7 rna using three different protocols. replicate samples of 25-50 pg mcf7 rna were rna-amplified using three commercial kits and 5 μg of the resulting cdna was analysed on affymetrix arrays. (a) miltenyi superamp™ replicates showed 865 genes present across both samples with a correlation of 0.800, (b) nugen ovation one-direct™ identified 1554 with a correlation of 0.723 and (c) epistem rna-amp™ identified 2667 present with a correlation of 0.866. (d) venn diagram showing overlap of genes present in both replicates of miltenyi, nugen and epistem samples (all analysis based on p ≤ 0.05).']. Reference sentences:[bioinformatic analysis of miltenyi super- amp™ material identified 865 expressed genes present in the duplicate samples with a correlation of 0.8 between the samples (figure 1a) nugen ovation® one-direct identified 1554 expressed genes with a correlation of 0.723 (figure 1b) and epistem rna-amp™ identified 2667 expressed genes with a correlation of 0.866 (figure 1c).comparison of the genes identified by each protocol showed 74.6% (645 of 865) of the expressed genes seen in the miltenyi superamp™ samples and 69.9% (1085 of 1554) found in the nugen ovation® one-direct samples were also identified in the epistem rna-amp™ samples with a total of 67.6% (1365 of 2018 genes) of all genes iden- tified by either superamp™ and/or ovation® one-direct being picked up in the rna-amp™ material (figure 1d).]
Summary: Correlation patterns of gene expression across different single-cell samples using three RNA amplification protocols.

Text 35
10.1186/s13059-015-0706-1
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 4 analysis of reverse complementary sequences and repeat elements for circrna formation. a three kinds of repeat element density in the introns adjacent to end-joining exons of circrnas. b circrnas are divided into three groups according to whether the upstream and downstream introns contain reverse complementary (rc) sequences and whether these sequences belong to repeat elements (rc-repeats and rc-nonrepeats). the circrna expression levels are normalized by the host gene fpkm. circrnas with adjacent introns containing rc sequences shows higher expression than those without rc sequences (nonrc). moreover, the circrna expression shows positive correlation with the number of rc sequence pairs (fig s8c in additional file 1). c we calculated the distance between the nearest pair of rc sequences by summing up their distances to the circrna splicing sites. when the distance is less than 5 kb, the rc sequences seem not to help circrna formation. d circrnas are classed by the strength of the upstream splicing site (up5′ and up3′) of the first exon forming the end-joining site and those with strong up3′ (top) show higher expression than those with weak up3′, while no differences caused by the strength of up5′ were observed. then when classing the circrnas by strength of downstream splicing motif (down5′ and down 3′), only circrnas with strong down5′ and weak down3′ show higher expression than all the other groups']. Reference sentences:[the densities of these repeat elements were not significantly different between introns flanking the cir- crnas and other random-selected control sequences (fig 4a).moreover the circrnas with unique non-repeat complementary sequences in their adjacent flanking introns show higher expression levels than those with repeat element complementary sequences in their adjacent flanking introns (fig 4b; fig s8c in additional file 1).interestingly the complementary se- quences in the adjacent flanking introns seem to work only when they are located more than 5 kb away from each other (fig 4c).according to our re- sults circrnas showed higher relative expression levels when the upstream exons contained stronger splicing mo- tifs but circrnas with strong downstream splicing motifs showed less relative expression than circrnas with weaker downstream splicing motifs (fig 4d).]
Patterns related to correlation between circRNA expression and presence of reverse complementary sequences in adjacent introns. Higher expression with more reverse complementary sequence pairs, stronger upstream splicing motifs, and weaker downstream splicing motifs.

Text 36
10.1016/j.stem.2015.07.002
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 4. transcriptional control of nsc activation and lineage priming (a) hierarchical clustering of the expression levels of 135 transcription factors with strong correlation (p < 1eà5) in the first two principal components in the pca. pca was performed on 92 nsc transcriptomes. selected tfs in each cluster are highlighted. cells are shown in rows and genes in columns. (b) one-dimensional pca of 92 nscs. each point corresponds to one cell and the color on each cell corresponds the scaled expression value of the respective gene in each single cell. (c) correlation heatmap for 23 selected transcription factors in 92 nscs. see also table s3. (d) confocal image of the svz immunostained for nr2f1 and gfap. scale bar, 100 mm. (e) representative genome tracks showing the expression of dorsal marker emx1 and ventral marker gli1 in two qnscs and two anscs. the ansc marker egfr and two widely expressed genes (actb and slc1a3) are shown.']. Reference sentences:[indeed tf expression alone identified qnsc and ansc clusters which completely overlapped with the whole-transcriptome pca-based separation (figure 4a).consistently using one-dimensional pc projections (durruthy-durruthy et al. 2014) we found that notch2 receptor and the notch target gene lfng were enriched in qnscs (figure 4b).actb slc1a3 egfr emx1 gli1 arhgap9 qnsc ansc 0-20 0-20 0-20 0-20 −4 −2 0 2 4 row z−score dsvz vsvz nr2f1 nr2f1 gfap a c d e b figure 4.interestingly the ligands bmp1 and bmp6 followed the same pattern (figure 4b).this analysis uncovered several clusters of factors whose expression varied in a correlated manner in the first five principal components (50% of variation; figure 4c).indeed as predicted in silico we found nr2f1 expression to be dorsally restricted (figure 4d).importantly this fate restriction is observed in both active and quiescent cells (figure 4e).]
Correlated expression patterns of transcription factors in neural stem cells identified distinct clusters, with specific markers enriched in different cell types.

Text 37
10.1016/j.stem.2015.07.002
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 2. single-cell rna-seq uncovers nsc heterogeneity (a) hierarchical clustering of 1,844 genes with high correlation (p < 1eà9) with the first four principal components of pca identifies four main, molecularly distinct populations. quiescent and active nsc groups are further subdivided in two subgroups. see also figure s3. cells are shown in rows and genes in columns. (b) violin plots showing the course of expression for genes in clusters ii–vii in cells from the neurogenic lineage (nscs and neuroblasts). main gene ontology terms for each class are highlighted (see also table s2). (c) minimum spanning tree (mst) constructed by monocle based on the expression pattern of 2,688 genes with the highest coordinates (p < 10eà5) with first two dimensions of pca on qnscs and anscs. each point represents a cell and the solid black line indicates the pseudotime ordering. different groups are colorcoded based on pca clustering. (d) facs strategy to enrich for qnscs and anscs by ﬂow cytometry based on egfr expression. for the inset in (e), egfrà cells were split according to glast expression as depicted with the dashed line. (e) representative image of a qnsc, ansc, and neuroblasts (nbs) incubated with op-puro for 1 hr and immunostained for glast. quantification of the relative op-puro incorporation in the different cell groups is shown at right (qnscs = 1 ± 0.09; anscs = 7.91 ± 0.35; nbs = 1.35 ± 0.05; mean and sd are shown; n = 1,029 cells from four replicates; p < 0.001 by two-way anova, holm-sidak-corrected). the inset shows quantification of op-puro incorporation in glasthi and glastlo qnscs as measured 1 hr after op-puro and 24 hr after sorting (hi = 1 ± 0.45, lo = 3.4 ± 0.50; n = 108 cells from two replicates; p < 0.01; student’s t test). see also figure s4. scale bar, 10 mm.']. Reference sentences:[this approach further partitioned nscs but not neu- roblasts or oligodendrocytes into two additional subpopulations (figure 2a).to obtain functional insights into the gene classes that define each cell subtype we performed gene ontology and pathway analyses (huang et al. 2009) on the seven modules of co-regu- lated genes obtained by hierarchical clustering (figure 2a).(tpm) figure 2.this analysis placed qnsc1 at one end of the continuum followed by qnsc2 ansc1 and ansc2 (figure 2c).because glast mrna expression is higher in dormant nscs we hypoth- esized that surface-protein expression of glast in combination with prom1 and the absence of egfr could be used to enrich for dormant and primed-quiescent nscs (figure 2d).analysis of op-puro incorporation in glasthi and glastlo qnscs showed that cells in the primed-quiescent state glastlo have a higher rate of protein synthesis than their dormant counterparts glasthi cells (figure 2e).further comparison of the ansc signature (genes in classes iv–vi in figure 2a) to recent ascl1 chip-seq data (andersen et al. 2014) revealed that a significant proportion of the ansc transcriptome is under the direct control of ascl1 (17.4% p < 1.65e=13; figure s3).(f) relative proportions of cells (from wt wt-injured and ifngr1=/= injured mice) in each of the qnsc subclasses as defined in figure 2. p values (fisher’s exact test) are p = 0.0006 and p = 0.02.]
Patterns related to correlation in gene expression profiles of neural stem cells are identified, leading to the subdivision of distinct cell populations based on molecular characteristics.

Text 38
10.1016/j.stem.2015.07.002
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 5. ifn-g-driven activation of dormant nscs after ischemic injury (a) scheme of the experimental design. (b) pca of 124 nsc transcriptomes (92 non-injured, in grayscale; 45 ischemic injured, in red). the proportion of nscs within the different transition states is significantly changed by the injury (p < 0.0006, fisher test). (c) relative gene expression values of dormant-nsc (qnsc1)-associated genes projected into the pca shown in (b). note that some injured cells (triangles) within the qnsc2 cluster retain higher expression than their non-injured counterparts. (d) string-based interaction plot for genes with the highest pc1 correlation in figure s5a. see also table s4. only genes with at least one interaction are shown. in red, predicted ifn-g target genes based on upstream regulator analysis (ipa) (p < 4.74eà10) are shown. (e) heatmap showing relative gene expression values across individual cells for 61 genes with the highest pc1 correlation (p < 1eà2). genes are shown in rows and cells from wt-injured and ifngr1à/à injured mice are shown in columns. (f) relative proportions of cells (from wt, wt-injured, and ifngr1à/à injured mice) in each of the qnsc subclasses as defined in figure 2. p values (fisher’s exact test) are p = 0.0006 and p = 0.02.']. Reference sentences:[single-cell rna-seq libraries were generated from 45 nscs isolated from the svz 2 days after ischemia (figure 5a).com- bined pca of injured and non-injured nscs revealed that ischemic injury activated the transition of nscs into activation (figure 5b).we also noted that several injured nscs with a primed-quiescent signature retained expression of genes otherwise only expressed by dormant cells under homeostatic conditions (figure 5c).indeed the injury-induced upregulation of inf-g-response genes was abro- gated in =90% of the ifngr1=/= cells (figure s5 and figure 5e).a b c d e f figure 5.]
Patterns related to correlation between gene expressions in different cell states after ischemic injury.

Text 39
10.1016/j.stem.2015.07.002
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 1. single-cell rna-seq analysis of nscs and neuroblasts defines cell-type-specific transcriptomes (a) confocal images of a wholemount staining of the lateral wall of the lateral ventricle. cells were immunostained for glast (green), gfap (blue), and prominin1 (prom-1) (white). pinwheel structures are defined by b-catenin (red). arrowheads mark the cilium of monociliated glast- and prom1-expressing cells. scale bar, 10 mm. (b) schematic representation of the svz. (c) facs strategy for the isolation of nscs, which express both glast and prom1, and neuroblasts, which express psa-ncam, from the svz niche. see also figures s1 and s2. (d) pca of single-cell rna-seq transcriptomes from 104 glast/prominin1 and 26 psa-ncam cells. see also table s1. (e) genes characterizing each population based on the correlations with principal components 2 and 3 from the pca (each point corresponds to a gene and previously known marker genes are highlighted in color).']. Reference sentences:[consistent with their nsc identity glast+ cells coexpressed gfap and were located at the center of the pinwheel structures (figure 1a).in agreement with previ- ous reports glast expression colocalized with prominin1 in some monociliated cells but not in multiciliated ependymal cells (figure 1a) (lavado and oliver 2011).this unbiased analysis clearly discriminated three main clusters of cells (figure 1d).these clusters were assigned to different cell types after we scrutinized the genes exhibiting the highest coor- dinates in the respective principal component for known marker genes (figure 1e).nb e c ßcat glast gfap prom1 svzz nsc a neuroblast roblas nerobla neu svz −1.0 −0.5 0 0.5 1.0 −1.0 −0.5 0 0.5 1.0 tubb3 sox10 cd24a dcx hes5 sox9 nr2e1 mbp glast figure 1.]
Patterns related to correlation between gene expressions and cell types were identified using single-cell RNA-seq data from NSCs and neuroblasts.

Text 40
10.1038/ni.3247
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 5 aire coordinates discrete interchromosomal gene networks. (a) gene-by-gene pearson correlations calculated from the weighted expression matrix for aire-induced genes (identified as in fig 1) in all mtecs from wild-type mice (n = 2); genes are ordered according to affinity-propagation clustering36, with no preset number of clusters. (b) correlations as in a, but in a control data matrix generated by random permutation of geneexpression values. (c) results of 1,000 random permutations and affinity-propagation clustering of the scrna-seq data for wild-type cells, presented as mean within-cluster correlation and quantification of significant correlations in each iteration (with significant clusters defined as clusters with more than 30 genes and a mean correlation of >0.75). (d) correlations as in a, but for aire-deficient mtecs (pooled from n = 2 mice) (left), and size and internal correlation of clusters in wild-type and aire-deficient mtecs (right). (e) quantification of significant gene-gene correlations defined as local (distance of less than 1 mb on the same chromosome), intrachromosomal (distance of more than 1 mb on same chromosome) or interchromosomal (different chromosomes) in the 23 largest clusters of the wild-type scrna-seq data sets in a. (f) gene-gene correlations between aire-induced transcripts (identified as in fig 1) calculated as in a for all wild-type mtecs (left), and calculated independently in mtecs from each wild-type mouse (middle and right). p = 0.002 and p = 0.001 (wilcoxon test). data are pooled from two independent experiments (a–c,e,f) or are from one experiment with 1,000 permutations (d).']. Reference sentences:[]
Patterns of gene-gene correlations, including interchromosomal relationships, in wild-type and aire-deficient single cells were analyzed.

Text 41
10.1038/ni.3247
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 2 scrna-seq analysis of mtecs. (a) sorting of single mtecs (red) from wild-type mice for scrna-seq analysis. (b) quantification of unique mappable reads versus genes detected for each wild-type cell (wt) or aire-deficient cell (ko) in the scrna-seq data sets; gray (excluded) indicates cells omitted from further analysis. (c) read ‘pileups’ for five illustrative genes (columns) in the scrna-seq data sets), in 26 representative cells (rows); only the carboxy-terminal exon is detected because the scrna-seq technique tags only sequences adjacent to poly(a). top, mrna: blue (sense) or red (antisense). (d) correlation between gfp fluorescence intensity during sorting (as in a) versus gfp mrna reads observed in each cell (pearson r = 0.56): dot size indicates the number of reads from the aire transcript (wedge). (e) mean single-cell read counts per gene versus bulk read counts of those same genes, in wild-type cells (pearson r = 0.72). data are pooled from two independent experiments with two mice per genotype (a) or two independent experiments (b–e).']. Reference sentences:[]
Summary: Correlation between gene expression levels and fluorescence intensity in single cells from wild-type and aire-deficient mice.

Text 42
10.1038/nature14966
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 5 | characterization of ex vivo isolated lgr5–egfp1 cells. a, heat map of transcriptome similarities measured by the euclidean distance of the transcriptome correlation matrix (see methods) for lgr5–egfp1 cells purified using an lgr5–egfp reporter mouse24. raceid clusters are colour coded along the axes. colours correspond to panel b. b, t-sne map of raceid clusters for lgr5–egfp1 cells. cells of cluster 7 express non-coding rnas (malat1, kcnq1ot1) and could not be characterized. the other cell types were assigned based on marker gene expression. the stem cell classes (1) (dotted line) and (2) (dashed line) are outlined (see text for details). c, t-sne map of raceid clusters for 5-day lineage tracing progeny of lgr5-positive (yfp1) cells. cell types identified based on marker genes are indicated. the stem cell class (3) is outlined (dashed line, see text for details). d, fraction of lgr5-positive cells for']. Reference sentences:[available methods for cell type identification5 were clearly out-performed by raceid (extended data fig 5a and supplementary note).we further showed that cell cycle related genes are unlikely to affect the results of raceid for our data set (extended data fig 5f).raceid classified these cells into a single large homogenous clus- ter and a few outliers (fig 5a b).as expected raceid detected differentiated cells of all major lineages with a relatively large proportion of paneth cells (fig 5c).while we detected lgr5 tran- scripts in 45% of the lgr5–egfp1 cells this fraction was lower than 15% for most of the other major cell types (fig 5d).only for paneth cells we observed an elevated proportion of lgr5-positive cells which was significantly higher in early (50%) compared to late paneth cells (28%) (fig 5d).to examine if the population of lgr5 expressing cells show any kind of fate bias towards a particular lineage we first distinguished three classes of stem cells: (1) all lgr5–egfp1 cells (fig 5b) (2) the subsetof lgr5–egfp1 cells after removal of the outliers identified by raceid (cluster 1 fig 5b) and (3) the stem cell/early ta cluster from the lineagetracing data(cluster 4 fig 5c).we then performed a marker gene analysis in all three classes and for comparison in cell populations of all major lineages (fig 5e).expression of secretory lineage markers (lyz1 and chgb) was substantially lower in class (2) and (3) compared to class (1) and did not exceed the background level observed in any other lineage (fig 5e).elevated expression of lyz1 and chgb in class (1) is thus solely due to the few lgr5–egfp1 secretory cells identified by raceid (fig 5b).however we consider this unlikely because expression of lgr5 is significantly elevated in early versus late paneth cells (fig 5d).all rights reserved extended data figure 5 | benchmarking raceid.]
Summary: Identification of cell clusters based on transcriptome similarities, excluding cell cycle effects, and distinguishing stem cell classes using marker gene analysis.

Text 43
10.1038/nature14966
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 1 | profiling cell composition of mouse intestinal organoids with single-cell sequencing. a, intestinal crypts were isolated from mice and grown into intestinal organoids as described previously1. organoids were dissociated and single cells, collected by fluorescence-activated cell sorting (facs), were sequenced by a modified version of the cel-seq method13,14 (see methods). b, heat map indicating similarities between 238 single cells measured by euclidean distances of the transcriptome correlation matrix (unitless; see methods). k-means clustering identified six major groups of cells colour coded along the axes. c, t-sne map representation of transcriptome similarities between individual cells. clusters identified in b were highlighted with different colours and corresponding intestinal cell types identified on the basis of known marker genes are indicated.']. Reference sentences:[to screen for abundant cell types more systematically we employed k-means clustering of the correlation matrix with six clus- ters as inferred by the gap statistic15 (see methods fig 1b and extended data fig 2b).we visualized these clusters in two dimensions (fig 1c) using t-distributed stochastic neighbour embedding (t-sne)16 and examined if expression of known intestinal marker genes was restricted to specific clusters (extended data fig 3).clusters are highlighted as in fig 1.c t-sne map of allclustersobtained bytheraceid algorithm (left)andclose-up of all clustersin the secretory lineage (cluster 3 in fig 1c).raceid detected only a single large cluster and few outliers that were mostly paneth cells (extended data fig 10) suggesting that intestinal stem cells represent a uniform population.all rights reserved extended data figure 1 | sequencing statistics.running the algorithm with k 5 6 (a) yields results very similar to k-means clustering with k 5 6 (fig 1c).]
Summary: Patterns of correlation between transcriptomes of individual cells were identified using k-means clustering and visualized with t-SNE, revealing distinct cell clusters based on marker genes.

Text 44
10.1016/j.cell.2015.08.027
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 2. single-cell expression profiling reveals macrophage subpopulations in infected cells (a) expression levels of genes (rows) in single bmms (columns) were measured using single-cell rna-seq after exposure to s. typhimurium and grouped by their infection phenotype (unexposed [white, n = 23], uninfected [gray, n = 24], and infected [green, n = 42]). genes are categorized into two clusters as described. the number of genes in each cluster is denoted next to the heatmap. genes are arranged by the extracellular or intracellular ratio (ic/ec ratio; left bars indicate the distribution of scores for each cluster; table s2a). (b) analysis of gene correlations across single cells revealed a cluster of bimodally expressed genes in infected cells (cluster iii). cells in (a) and (b) are sorted according to average expression of cluster iii. (c) highly variable genes in infected cells are enriched for immune response pathways (table s2c). localized regression was used to estimate the mean/variance relationship for genes in infected macrophages. genes were assigned a variance score based on their distance from the fitted relationship (solid line). (d) box plots of variance scores for either exposure (cluster i) or infection response genes (cluster ii), at three time points following infection, are shown. infection response genes have reproducibly higher variance then exposure response genes (p < 0.01 by wilcoxon rank-sum test; table s2d). (e) representative examples of single-cell gene expression distributions in infected cells from clusters i, ii, and iii. see also figure s2 and table s2.']. Reference sentences:[bimodal induction of type i ifn response genes in infected macrophages it has been previously suggested that immune networks may be structured to produce subpopulations of cells with distinct a b tnf sod2 nfkbiz nos2 il12b herc6 ifit2 mx1 genes unexposed uninfected infected cluster i cluster ii cluster iii single cells (376) (167) (130) time (hrs) 2.5 8 4 gene variance estimate infection response (cluster ii) 10 20 30 0 5 10 15 log2 expression variance log2 expression mean best-fit estimate per-gene estimate 3.5 -3.5 variance score infected cells infected cells c d exposure response (cluster i) gene expression cell density time 02.5 hrs 4 hrs 8 hrs 5 0 5 10 15 20 0.0 1.0 5 0 5 10 15 20 0.0 1.0 rpl35 tnf (cluster i) 5 0 5 10 15 20 0.0 1.0 nos2 (cluster ii) 5 0 5 10 15 20 0.0 1.0 ifit2 (cluster iii) e ic/ec ration -2 2 0 expression -14 14 0 key for a b -2 0 2 4 figure 2.we developed a scoring system based on localized linear regression to estimate each gene’s variance in a manner that is largely independent of mean expression (experimental procedures; figure 2c).]
Bimodal gene expression patterns in infected cells, with distinct clusters showing different levels of variability and immune response pathways enrichment.

Text 45
10.1016/j.cell.2015.08.040
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 2. validation of single-cell damid maps (a) comparison nl contact map for chr1 representing the average of 118 single-cell profiles (top profile) and a conventional damid map generated with a population of z1- 2 3 105 cells (bottom profile). the genome-wide correlation between the two methods is 0.90 (spearman’s r.) (b) average oe score of 118 single-cell dam-lmnb1 samples (y axis) versus the average oe score of 26 single-cell dam-only samples (x axis). (c) comparison of average oe scores obtained with dam-lmnb1 (top track, average of 118 cells, same as in figure 1b) and dam-only (bottom track, average of 26 cells). oe scores for the individual dam-only cells are shown as grayscale-encoded rows in the center frame. gray bars underneath the bottom axis mark unmappable regions; c, centromeric region.']. Reference sentences:[validation of single-cell maps to further gauge the overall quality of these data we first recon- structed a population profile by averaging the maps of the 118 single cells and then compared it to a conventional microarray- based damid profile generated from a large pool of kbm7 cells (figure 2a).]
Patterns related to correlation between single-cell and population-level data are shown, with a correlation coefficient of 0.90.

Text 46
10.1016/j.cell.2015.09.004
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 3. candidate org markers relate to position, morphology, and behavior of cell type (a) scatterplot highlighting specificity of genes to inferred radial glia subpopulations. specificity is calculated by pearson correlation with an idealized marker gene expressed only in candidate org cells (y axis) or candidate vrg cells (x axis). orange, green, and yellow boxes highlight genes with predicted specificity for org, vrg, and all radial glia cells (pan-rg), respectively (see also figure s3). (b) left heatmap showing expression of org, vrg, and pan-rg genes across inferred cell types and their average expression in microdissected cortical tissue samples (right heatmap) (miller et al., 2014). (c) similarity matrix of org- and vrg-specific gene expression levels across radial glia cells. (d) representative examples of in situ hybridization staining for candidate vrg and org markers in human cortical tissue sections at gw18.2. inset shows higher magnification of positively stained region (scale bar, 25 mm).']. Reference sentences:[cell 163 55–67 september 24 2015 ª2015 elsevier inc. 57 figure 3.we identified 67 candidate marker genes strongly correlated with the org popu- lation 33 candidate genes strongly correlated with the vrg pop- ulation and 31 genes strongly correlated with both radial glia populations (figure 3a green orange and yellow boxes respec- tively; table s3).we found that expression of vrg candidates cryab pdgfd tagln2 fbxo32 and palld was strongest in the vz whereas expression of org candidates hopx ptprz1 tnc fam107a and moxd1 was strongest in the osvz (figure 3d).immunostaining re- vealed expression of hopx ptprz1 and tnc proteins in cells with basal fibers that lacked eomes expression linking this mo- lecular identity to the typical morphology of org cells (figure 3f).]
Summary: Correlation patterns of candidate markers with specific cell populations, shown by gene expression levels and in situ hybridization in single-cell transcriptomics.

Text 47
10.1016/j.stem.2015.09.011
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 5. 2c-like population (a) clustering of cells grown in 2i using markers of the 2c-like state (macfarlan et al., 2012). correlations were calculated using spearman correlation. the dendrogram divides cells into two groups, one of which contains ten cells expressing 2c-markers. (b) boxplot showing percentage of reads mapping to the exons in both subpopulations of cells in 2i. p was calculated using a wilcoxon test. (c) boxplot showing rpm (reads per million) mapping to the mervl retrovirus in both subpopulations of cells in 2i. p was calculated using a wilcoxon test. (d) mean expression of genes reported to be at least 2-fold upregulated or downregulated in 2c-like cells (macfarlan et al., 2012) in cells that we identified as 2c-like cells and in the remaining 2i cells.']. Reference sentences:[hierarchical clustering suggested the presence of ten 2c-like cells in 2i and none in the a2i or serum culture conditions (2c-like cells may still be present in a2i and serum but at a very low rate) (figure 5a).globally the transcriptomes of 2c cells are altered and only about 50% of reads on average map to exons compared to 60% in the remaining population in 2i (figure 5b).additionally we observed substantial mervl expression in 2c-like cells and no expression in the remaining cells (figure 5c).(2012) as differentially expressed in 2c- like cells and observed a similar pattern in our data (figure 5d).interestingly we also observe that 2c-like cells have more upre- gulated genes than downregulated genes (figure 5e).2c-like cells cluster together with 2i cells (figure 5a) and there are only 294 differentially ex- pressed genes between 2c-like cells and the remaining 2i cells (examples in figure 5f).in terms of expression of nanog oct4 sox2 and myc 2c-like cells are also similar to 2i cells in comparison to the two-cell and blasto- cyst stages of the embryo (figure 5g).cell stem cell 17 471–485 october 1 2015 ª2015 the authors 479 a b c d e f g figure 5.]
Summary: Correlation patterns between 2c-like cells and remaining 2i cells, including gene expression, exon mapping, and retrovirus expression.

Text 48
10.1016/j.stem.2015.09.011
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 6. spearman correlation matrix of transcription factors and key pluripotency genes the heatmap shows the correlation coefficients between a set of transcription factors and other key genes involved in pluripotency. above are examples of genes with expression patterns that correlate positively and negatively (from the left: zfp42 and creb3, zfp42 and nanog, tet1 and tet2, tet1 and jarid2).']. Reference sentences:[nanog is negatively correlated with differentiation regula- tors including transcription factors gata3 and klf7 (figure 6).]
Summary: Correlation patterns between transcription factors and key genes in pluripotency, including positive and negative correlations.

Text 49
10.1101/gr.192237.115
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure s1. coexpression of hematopoeitic transcriptional modules across single cells (a-b) in each of the six cell populations (columns) shown is the average pearson correlation coefficient (color bar, top) among genes from each coarse transcriptional module defined by the immunological genome (immgen) project (rows), sorted by their average coexpression, analyzed either on all cells (a) or after excluding all cycling cells (b). module annotations are shown for some of the top modules in which annotations were defined by the immgen consortium. almost all of the highest correlations were cell cycle dependent and the strongest remaining coexpression was among ribosomal genes (module #4).']. Reference sentences:[]
Summary: Coexpression patterns of transcriptional modules across single cells, with highest correlations in cell cycle-dependent genes and strong coexpression in ribosomal genes.

Text 50
10.1186/s13742-015-0091-4
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 3 heterogeneity of gene expression in hela s3 single cells. a the mrna molecular number in single cells and 10 pg rna replicates. b the heat map of the fpkm values of extremely highly expressed genes (fpkm > 500 in bulk rna) in single cells and 10 pg replicates. c single-cell subpopulations identification based on cell cycle relative genes. the cells with underline are in g2/m phase. d gene co-expression modules derived from 19 single cells based on rna molecular number (modules are distinguished by colors). the detailed of each module stands for were shown on additional file 4: table s7. the weighted gene correlation network was constructed using the wcgna r package [38]. Reference sentences:]we found striking cell-to- cell differences in the total transcript numbers of single cells (67000–233000) but relatively uniform numbers in the 10 pg rna libraries (79000–142000) (fig 3a).we found that even for extremely high expressed genes of bulk rna they expressed a high range in single cells (fpkm > 500 fig 3b).to further analyze cell-to-cell gene expression variability we examined the expression profile of 10 pg rna replicates whose variation appears to be technical noise (fig 3b).in the clustering result a group of 7 cells (19 %) displayed higher expression of g2/m phase marker genes (fig 3c).in total 4329 genes were selected for co-expression analysis by wgcna identify- ing 18 distinct co-expression modules and determined reactome pathways for each module (fig 3d fdr < 0.05 additional file 4: table s7).for the largest module (blue in fig 3d) genes were highly enriched in pathways of me- tabolism of rna and protein and translation.genes from the second largest module (light yellow in fig 3d) were enriched in cell cycle and immune system genes.]
Patterns of gene co-expression modules and cell cycle subpopulations in single cells were identified based on gene correlation.

Text 51
10.1016/j.cell.2015.11.009
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 3. a spectrum of pathogenicity states in vitro (a) pca plot of th17 cells differentiated in vitro. pc1 separates cells from most (left) to least (right) pathogenic, as indicated by both the differentiation condition (color code) and the correlated signatures (numbered circles). (b–d) key signatures related to pathogenicity. cdfs of the single-cell scores for key signatures for the three in vitro populations (colored as in a): (b) a signature distinguishing the in vivo th17/th1-like memory subpopulation (blue in figure 2c); (c) a signature distinguishing the in vivo th17 self-renewing subpopulation (green in figure 2c); and (d) a signature of pathogenic th17 cells (lee et al., 2012). (e) cdfs of expression level (fpkm+1, log10) of il10 for the three in vitro populations. see also table s2.']. Reference sentences:[we analyzed single-cell rna-seq profiles of 420 th17 cells derived under non-pathogenic (tgf-b1+il-6 unsorted: 130 cells from 2 biological replicates and tgf-b1+il-6; sorted for il-17a/gfp+: 151 cells from 3 biological replicates) and patho- genic conditions (il-1b+il-6+il-23 sorted for il-17a/gfp+: 139 cells from 2 biological replicates) (figure 3a).there is a zone of overlap in cell states between the path- ogenic and non-pathogenic conditions (figure 3a) with cells polarized under the non-pathogenic (tgf-b1+il-6) condition that were not sorted to be il-17a/gfp+ spanning the broadest pathogenicity spectrum (figures 3a and 3d).and v.k.k unpublished data) correlates highly with the more regula- tory cells confirming the role of the il-23 pathway in pathoge- nicity (figure 3a).the correlated time points match with variation along pc2 (figure 3a) but not pc1 suggesting that pathogenicity is not a reﬂection of the cell’s position along the differentiation trajectory but is an orthogonal aspect of cell state.using these modules as signatures to annotate the original in vitro cell states (figure 4c) we find that a signature comparing the module co-varying with pro-inﬂammatory genes to the a b c d e figure 3.]
Patterns of pathogenicity states in single cells, correlated with key signatures and gene expression levels, distinguish different cell populations.

Text 52
10.1016/j.cell.2015.11.009
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 1. single-cell rna-seq of th17 cells in vivo and in vitro (a) experimental setup. (b–e) quality of single-cell rna-seq. scatter plots (b–d) compare transcript expression (fpkm+1, log10) from the in vitro tgf-b1+il-6 48 hr condition between two bulk population replicates (b), the ‘‘average’’ of single-cell profile and a matched bulk population control (c), or two single cells (d). histograms (e) depict the distributions of pearson correlation coefficients (x axis) between single cells and their matched population control and between pairs of single cells. (f and g) comparison to rna flow-fish. (f) expression distributions by rna-seq and rna flow-fish at 48 hr under the tgf-b1+il-6 in vitro condition. negative control: bacterial dapb gene. (g) bright-field and ﬂuorescence channel images of rna flow-fish in negative (left) and positive (right) cells. see also figure s1 and table s1.']. Reference sentences:[results rna-seq profiling of single th17 cells isolated in vivo and in vitro we profiled the transcriptome of 976 th17 cells (ultimately retaining 722 cells below) either harvested in vivo or differenti- ated in vitro (figure 1a table s1 and experimental procedures).following these filters expression profiles tightly correlated between population replicates (figure 1b) and be- tween the average expression across single cells and the match- ing population profile (r = 0.65–0.93; figures 1c s1d and s2).these cells could either be sta- ble ‘‘double producers’’ or could reﬂect th17 plasticity into the a b d f g e c figure 1.]
Patterns related to correlation between single cells and population controls in th17 cells transcriptome profiling.

Text 53
10.1016/j.cell.2015.11.013
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 3. surface-marker-based enrichment of myeloid progenitor subgroups (a) isolation of progenitor populations c8, c10, and c11 (fcgrint cd34+ gates; figure 1d) by the expression of cell-surface markers and transgenic markers: cd41, flt3-csf1r, and irf8-mhc-ii, respectively. these subtypes show hematopoietic progenitors’ morphology as shown by giemsa staining in lower panels (scale bar, 5 mm). (b) mapping of single-cell rna-seq from sub-sorted populations to the myeloid model reveals enrichment of clusters c8 in cd41+, c10 in flt3+csf1r+, and c11 in irf8+mhc-ii+ when compared to the original distributions (top). colors are as indicated in figure 2a. (c) color-coded expression of key genes that mark the enriched subpopulation. data are shown for single cells that were mapped to the targeted expression cluster (d and e) shown are representative genes displaying intensified or repressed expression with pf4 expression (for c8, [d]) or mpo expression (for c10, [e]). expression correlations with pf4/mpo are shown in brackets. (f) expression profile of a subset of differential genes within the subgroups of irf8+ mhc-ii+ (c11) population.']. Reference sentences:[we searched for currently available markers and transgenic mice that could enrich for three of our subpopulations: cd41+ (itga2b) to enrich for the c8 population expressing the megakaryocyte program (mk) cd135 in combination with cd115 (flt3+/csf1r+) to enrich for the c10 (monocyte) subpopulation and an irf8 gfp-transgenic mouse along with mhc-ii marker (irf8+/mhc- ii+) to enrich for population c11 (dc; figure 3a).to define how the variation within this group is linked with the mk fate we formed five groups of cells by stratifying over normalized levels of the most strongly expressed mk-specific gene in the data pf4 (figure 3d).we performed a stratified analysis using ten levels of mpo gene expression and identified monocyte-specific genes (ly6e prtn3 cstg) as positively correlated with the mpo signa- ture and several other genes (including flt3 itself ptpn18 and lsp1) as anti-correlated with the mpo signature (figure 3e).(c) cd41+ cmp (c8 enriched [figure 3b]) which produced more gfp+ progeny in the blood contributed to erythrocyte and thrombocyte lineages; n = 2.(d) flt3+csf1r+ cmp (c10 enriched [figure 3b]) which differentially produced splenocytes largely contributed to the dc lineage; n = 4.myeloid subtypes are epigenetically distinct (a) representative examples of regions marked by h3k4me2 in cd41+ (c8 enriched [figure 3b]) compared to the control cmp population (see also figure s6).compared to biological replicate (b) or the remaining cmp populations (c) (d–f) same as (a)–(c) but for flt3+ csf1r+ (c10-enriched [figure 3b]) (g–i) same as (a)–(c) but for irf8+ mhc-ii+ (c11-enriched [figure 3b]) (j) heatmap showing k-means clustering of h3k4me2 read density in putative enhancers across the myeloid branches of the hematopoietic system as described in lara-astiaso et al.]
Patterns related to correlation between gene expressions in enriched myeloid progenitor subgroups.

Text 54
10.1073/pnas.1520760112
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 5. genomic scans of disease, evolutionary, and chromatin signatures highlight genetic aspects of human corticogenesis that can be modeled in vitro. shown is the covariation network using genes that have high correlation (>0.3) with tfs controlling the ap–bp–neuron lineage from fig 2c. select tf nodes are highlighted to delineate the path. (i–iv) panels show genes that have amino acid changes that are modhum (i, green), omim (ii, turquoise), hcondel (iii, blue), or hadhs (iv, orange). the percentage of cells that have a positive correlation (>0.4) between fetal and organoid cells is shown, with nodes colored based on the correlation coefficient (dataset s4).']. Reference sentences:[we projected these changes onto a gene regulatory network inferred from correlations with the tfs that control the ap–bp–neuron lineages in the fetal cortex (fig 5).]
Summary: Correlation patterns between genes and transcription factors in human corticogenesis, highlighting genetic aspects and modeling in vitro.

Text 55
10.1073/pnas.1520760112
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 1. deconstructing cell composition in the fetal human neocortex. (a) scrna-seq was performed on cells from two human neocortex specimens at 12–13 wpc. schematic shows npc types (aps, bps) and neurons (n) enriched in zones within the human neocortex at midneurogenesis. ap, apical progenitor; bp, basal progenitor; cp, cortical plate; isvz, inner subventricular zone; osvz, outer subventricular zone; vz, ventricular zone. (b) heat maps show normalized correlation (z-score) of single-cell transciptomes from human wpc 12 (light green) and wpc 13 (dark green) cerebral cortex with bulk rna-seq data from lasermicrodissected zones (left, 18) or facs-purified cell types (right, 19) from the human neocortex at the same developmental stage. (c) hierarchical clustering of scrna-seq data reveals cell types in the human fetal cortex. each row represents a single cell and each column a gene. genes were discovered using pca (si methods). the maximum correlation to bulk rna-seq data from germinal zones is shown in the left sidebar. cell-type assignment is shown on the right sidebar. expression of genes used to classify aps, bps, newborn neurons (n1), and maturing neurons (n2 and n3) are show to the right of the cell-type assignment bar. top go enrichments are shown above the heat map, with representative genes listed below.']. Reference sentences:[we analyzed 226 single-cell transcriptomes from 12- and 13-wk postconception (wpc) human neocortex specimens (fig 1a) and performed principal components analysis (pca) on all variable genes (variance > 0.5) expressed in more than two cells to survey cell diversity in this dataset (fig s1a).we next used all expressed genes to characterize cells based on their maximum correlation with bulk rna-seq data from laser-dissected germinal zones namely vz (containing a majority of arg) isvz and osvz (containing a majority of bips brg neurons and migrating neu- rons) and cp (containing mature neurons) (18) or facs-purified arg brg and neurons (19) (fig 1b).using these genes (dataset s1) we hierarchically clustered cells and identified seven major cell clus- ters that we classified as different populations of aps bps and neurons based on the expression of known cell-type marker genes and correlations with bulk data (fig 1c).ap1 cells (16 cells) expressed cell-cycle genes (group f) enriched during s/g2/m phase progression (e.g. mki67) whereas ap2 a c b ap1 fig 1.cells (circles colored based on cell type) are arranged in the 2d independent component space based on genes used to classify cells in fig 1c.]
Patterns related to correlation between single-cell transcriptomes and bulk RNA-seq data from different zones in the human fetal cortex.

Text 56
10.1073/pnas.1520760112
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 4. similar gene expression profiles characterize lineage progression in organoid and fetal cerebral cortex. (a) organoid ap–bp–neuron lineage. pca on organoid dorsal cortex cells identified genes used for monocle. the minimal spanning tree (gray lines) connects cells (circles, colored by cell type). black line indicates the longest path (dataset s3 and fig s5). (b) monocle plot with cells colored by maximum correlation with bulk rna-seq data from germinal zones (far left) or marker gene expression (middle left, middle right, and far right). (c) scatter plot shows correlation (pearson) between fetal and organoid average expression per cell type for marker tfs. (d) heat map shows tf expression in organoid and fetal cells ordered by pseudotime. top bars show cell type and maximum correlation with germinal zones. each tf’s expression was averaged across cells of a given type (ap, bp, n1, n2, and n3), and the pearson correlation between fetal and organoid cell types is shown to the right of the heat map. (e) cell lineage network and dendrogram (top right) based on pairwise correlations between fetal (orange) and organoid (red) cells show that npcs and neurons intermix.']. Reference sentences:[(12/15 80%) notch/delta signaling (7/10 70%) and neurite outgrowth (24/25; 96%) (fig 4 d and e and fig s6 b–d).]
Patterns of correlation between fetal and organoid cells, particularly in marker TF expression, along cell lineage progression.

Text 57
10.1073/pnas.1520760112
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 2. reconstructing lineage relationships in the fetal neocortex. (a) monocle reveals an ap–bp–neuron lineage that correlates with the zones of the developing neocortex. cells (circles, colored based on cell type) are arranged in the 2d independent component space based on genes used to classify cells in fig. 1c. the minimal spanning tree (gray lines) connects cells, with the black line indicating the longest path. (b) monocle plots with single cells are colored based on the maximum correlation with bulk rna-seq data from cortical zones (far left) or gene expression that distinguishes the lineage transitions (middle left, middle right, and far right). (c) transcription factor (tf) correlation network during lineage progression. shown are nodes (tfs) with more than three edges, with each edge reflecting a high correlation (>0.3) between connected tfs.']. Reference sentences:[we next inferred lineage relationships among the cells using monocle an algorithm that combines differential gene expression dimension reduction and minimal spanning tree construction to link cells along a pseudotemporally ordered path (17) (fig 2a).notably expression of genes known to be enriched in aps (e.g. sox2) bps (e.g. eomes) and neurons (e.g. myt1l) exhibited re- stricted expression along the lineage path (fig 2b).we constructed a transcription factor (tf) correlation network to understand the gene expression changes occurring during transitions through the ap–bp–neuron lineage (fig 2c).c10 and c11 contain cycling and noncycling mesenchymal cells that express extracellular a b c fig 2.shown is the covariation network using genes that have high cor- relation (>0.3) with tfs controlling the ap–bp–neuron lineage from fig 2c.]
Patterns related to correlation between gene expressions along the lineage path in single cells are shown.

Text 58
10.1038/cr.2015.149
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 3 drg neuron subclusters and the “hybrid states” of subclusters. (a) an enlargement of c4 on the heatmap of the correlation matrix and wgcna eigengenes (figure 2a and 2b) reveal two distinct subclusters, c4-1 and c4-2, outlined by black frames. (b) single-cell real-time pcr confirming the differential expression of mrgpra3, mrgprb4 and mrgprd in c4-1 and c4-2 neurons (n = 3). (c) double fluorescent ish showing the co-expression of mrgprb4 in a subpopulation of mrgpra3-positive small drg neurons (arrows). scale bars, 100 µm (left) and 20 µm (right). (d) differential distribution of mrgpra3, mrgprb4 and mrgprd in c4 and c5. (e) gene co-expression network identified by wgcna shows that the mrgpra3-containing network is separate from the mrgprb4 network in the pink module. (f) an enlargement of c2-1 and c2-2 in the heatmap of the correlation matrix and wgcna (figure 2a and 2b). (g) single-cell pcr confirming the differential expression of representative genes in c2-1 and c2-2 neurons (n = 3). (h) single-cell pcr showing expression of pvalb in an nppb-positive, ib4-negative neuron. (i) double fluorescent ish showing co-expression of il31ra with s100b or cpne6 in a small drg neuron (arrow). scale bar, 20 µm. (j) the correlation among nppb, il31ra, s100b and cpne6 expression in clusters of small and large neurons and their predicted relationships with different types of afferent fibers.']. Reference sentences:[the neuron correlation matrix showes that small neurons in c4 can be further divided into two subclusters c4-1 and c4-2 (figure 3a).the differential genes shown in the corresponding module of wgcna reveals that c4-1 neurons express mrgpra3 whereas c4-2 neurons express both mrgpra3 and mrgprb4 (figure 3a).both single-cell real-time pcr of the sequenced neurons in c4 and double-fluorescent ish proved the existence of the c4 subclusters (figure 3b-d).mrgprb4 is present in ~22.1% of mrgpra3-expressing neurons (n = 104 figure 3c).the gene co-expression network of mrgprb4 is separate from that of mrgpra3 although they are found in the same module (figure 3e).some neurons within a cluster expressed the representative genes of other clusters a situation referred to “hybrid state.” in this manner c2 is divided into subclusters c2-1 and c2-2 (figure 3f).the level of nppb and il31ra in c2-2 is lower than that in c2-1 and pvalb and nefh were expressed strongly in c2-2 but are not detectable in c2-1 as shown by single-cell real-time pcr (figure 3g).to confirm the existence of c2 subclusters ib4-negative small neurons (area < 314 µm2) selected randomly from dissociated drg neurons were analyzed by single-cell pcr (figure 3h).double fluorescent ish proved that il31ra is co-ex- pressed with s100b and cpne6 in small drg neurons (figure 3i).the hybrid state is found to be a property of some clusters or subclusters of small neurons that are genetically cor- related with large neurons suggesting that they might be small neurons with aδ-fibers (figure 3j).]
Patterns of gene co-expression and differential expression within subclusters of small neurons, indicating potential hybrid states and correlations with different types of afferent fibers.

Text 59
10.1038/cr.2015.149
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 5 functional characteristics of neuron clusters. (a) a diagram illustrating the potential correlation between neuron clusters and the differential expression of functional molecules involved in thermoception, mechanoception, nociception, chemicoception and pruriception. representative functions of molecules are mainly based on the studies conducted in gene knockout mice. t, thermal nociception; m, mechanical nociception; f, formalin nociception. (b) a diagram illustrating the procedures of in vivo electrophysiological recording and simultaneous stimulus application to the plantar skin of the mouse hindpaw as well as neuron classification by single-cell pcr. (c) examples of neurons responding to various cutaneous stimuli and their cluster identities. the application of a peripheral stimulus results in a large inward na+ current and a small outward k+ current, and generates an action potential in the responding neuron. (d) table showing the number of responsive neurons and their classification.']. Reference sentences:[a heterogeneity analysis of signaling molecules in neuron clusters as well as previous reports implies the functionalities of these neuron clusters (figure 5a; supplementary information data s1).trpv1 is expressed strongly in c1-1 and moderately in c1-2 and c2-1 (figure 5a; supplemen- tary information figure s8b).the cross-cluster expression of genes encoding mecha- noreceptive molecules such as trpcs kcnks asic3 and piezo2 suggests that mechanical stimuli are sensed by neurons in multiple clusters (figure 5a).the predicted sensitivity of clusters to chemicals depends on the differ- ential expression of chemical receptors (figure 5a).the differential expression of pruritogen receptors and npb encoded by nppb suggests that c2 c4 and c5 selective- ly transduce itch signals generated by pruritogens (figure 5a).mrna diffusing into the internal solu- tion of the recording pipette was collected and processed for single-cell quantitative real-time pcr to evaluate the expression levels of neuron-type markers including gal zcchc12 cldn9 nppb nts sst th mrgpra3 mrgprb4 mrgprd nefh pvalb nxph1 and baiap2l1 (figure 5b).this analysis was successfully carried out for 69 respon- sive neurons (figure 5c and 5d).cluster sorting showed that c1 c2 c4 c5 c6 and c7 are involved in sensing heat and pinch (figure 5d) but have different preferred stimuli.mrgpr a3 in c4 mrgpr d in c5 and c6 and mrgpr c11 in c2 and c4 are major itch receptors (figure 5a).]
Summary: Correlation between neuron clusters and differential expression of functional molecules involved in sensory perception, including thermoception, mechanoception, nociception, chemicoception, and pruriception.

Text 60
10.1038/nn.4216
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 4 cell types summary and relationships. (a–c) constellation diagrams showing core and intermediate cells for all cell types. core cells (n = 1,424 total, 664 gabaergic, 609 glutamatergic, 151 non-neuronal) are represented by colored disks with areas corresponding to the number of core cells for each cluster. linked tags include cell type names based on marker genes and layers; unique markers are in red. intermediate cells (n = 255 total, 97 gabaergic, 155 glutamatergic, 3 non-neuronal) are represented by lines connecting disks; line thickness corresponds to the number of such cells. (a) gabaergic types are grouped according to major classes and arranged by their preferential location (enrichment) in upper versus lower cortical layers. up and down arrows in disks represent statistically significant enrichment determined by layer-enriching dissections (supplementary table 5). locations for other clusters are estimates that combine marker gene expression or cre-line expression based on rna ish. the position at the border of upper and lower layers represents lack of evidence for location preference. (b) glutamatergic types are arranged according to cortical layer. (c) non-neuronal types share few intermediate cells among one another. 96rik, 9630013a20rik. (d) dendrogram depicting relatedness of the mean gene expression pattern for all cell types based on core cells (n = 1,424) and genes (n = 13,878) with s.d. for expression >1 across all types. the distance metric is pearson’s correlation coefficient over the genes in the log10(rpkm+1) space. the tree was generated by standard hierarchical clustering with average linkage.']. Reference sentences:[]
Summary: Correlation patterns of gene expression among different cell types based on core cells and genes.

Text 61
10.1038/ncomms10220
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 2 | single-cell rna-seq with known lineage relationships and times since division. (a) comparison of euclidean distances (measured in logtransformed transcripts per million) between sister cells, cousin cells and unrelated cells for cd8 þ t-cells (n ¼ 43, 73 and 4,544, respectively) and l1210 cells (n ¼ 37, 60 and 3,064, respectively) for the entire gene set (9,997 genes and 10,658 genes for cd8 þ t-cells and l1210, respectively). groups were compared with a mann–whitney u-test (methods). the shaded area overlay on the unrelated cell pair measurements has a width corresponding to differences in time since division for these cells. the widths were constructed using a 250-point moving average of the pairwise differences in time since division for visual clarity. scale bar, 3 h. (b) same analysis as in (a) applied to a subset of genes with cell cycle-related gene annotations (688 genes total) for cd8 þ t-cells. (c) same analysis as in a,b applied to a subset of genes with gene annotations related to t-cell activation and function (142 genes total) for cd8 þ t-cells. (groups were compared with a mann–whitney u-test. after bonferroni correction: po0.05, po0.01, po0.001. not-significant (ns) indicates a p value 40.05.) (d) plot of granzyme b expression levels (measured in log-transformed transcripts per million) in sister cell pairs (blue circles), cousin cell pairs (red circles) and unrelated cell pairs (grey scale density plot with darkest regions corresponding to highest relative occupancy). the correlation coefficients of related and unrelated cell pairs were compared with a fisher’s z transformation (p ¼ 0.005). (e) plot of granzyme b expression levels as a function of the time since division for each single cell. (f,g) plot of scores on the first latent variable of partial least squares regression models constructed with expression measurements as predictor variables and the time since division for each single cell as the response variable for cd8 þ t-cells (f) and l1210 cells (g). the final models were constructed with genes corresponding to the top 300 vip scores for each cell type (supplementary fig 9, methods).']. Reference sentences:[by establishing unique pressure gradients along (p1–p2 and p1–p3) and across (p2–p3) the bypass channels this ﬂuidic design decouples the ﬂow through the bypass channels from the ﬂow across each lane of traps (supplementary fig 2).when comparing global expression levels in both cell types sister cell pairs showed significantly higher transcriptional similarity than unrelated cell pairs (p ¼ 0.03 and po0.001 for l1210 and cd8 þ t-cells respectively mann–whitney u-test) (fig 2a).since each founding cd8 þ t-cell loaded in to the device represents a unique clone these results suggest lower intra- than interclonal transcriptional variation for these cells (fig 2a–c).when performing the aforementioned analysis on a subset of genes with functional relevance to cd8 þ t-cell activation differentiation and cytotoxic function there was once again significantly greater intraclonal transcriptional similarity (po0.001 mann–whitney u-test) (fig 2c supplementary data 3).interestingly gene expression for granzyme b (gzmb)—whose protein product plays a key role in cytotoxic t-cell-mediated target cell killing—showed one of the highest levels of clonal similarity with strong correlations in gzmb expression levels between sisters (r2 ¼ 0.524 n ¼ 43) and cousins (r2 ¼ 0.517 n ¼ 73) as compared with unrelated cells (r2 ¼ 0.002 n ¼ 4544) (fig 2d).for cd8 þ t-cells this effect was even more pronounced when considering a subset of genes with cell cycle-related functional annotation (po0.001 mann–whitney u-test) (fig 2b supplementary fig 8b).however this dependence on cell cycle stage was less pronounced for a subset of genes in cd8 þ t-cells with functional annotations relating to t-cell activation and function (fig 2c supplementary fig 8c).expression levels of these genes—including gzmb—showed a strong correlation between related cells but no correlation with time since division (p ¼ 0.005 fisher’s z transformation fig 2de).reconstructing the models with these reduced gene lists resulted in strong correlations between the latent variable scores and experimental measurements of time since division for both the cd8 þ t-cells (r2 ¼ 0.77±0.03 s.d. n ¼ 10 iterations ) and l1210 cells (r2 ¼ 0.84±0.02 s.d. n ¼ 10 iterations) (fig 2fg).across all 10 iterations are reported in fig 2ef.]
Correlation patterns in gene expression levels between related cells, especially for genes related to cell cycle and T-cell function.

Text 62
10.1038/nmeth.3728
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 2 | genome-wide associations between methylation and transcriptional heterogeneity in mouse escs. (a) correlation coefficients (pearson r2) from association tests between gene expression heterogeneity of individual genes and dna-methylation heterogeneity in alternative genomic contexts. shown are the correlation coefficients for all genes versus the adjusted p value (obtained using benjamini-hochberg correction and denoted by dot size). a set of 86 known pluripotency and differentiation genes18 are highlighted in red. the blue horizontal line in each plot corresponds to the fdr 10% significance threshold. the total number of significant positive (+) and negative (−) correlations (fdr < 10%) for each annotation is shown at the top of each plot. orange vertical bars correspond to the average correlation coefficient across all genes for a given context. (b) representative zoomedin analysis for esrrb. shown from bottom to top are the annotation of the esrrb locus with lmr, p300, super-enhancer and cgi sites indicated; the estimated methylation rate of 3-kb windows for each cell, with dot size corresponding to cpg coverage, dot colors corresponding to single cells, the solid black curve denoting the weighted mean methylation rate across all cells, and solid and dashed vertical lines delineating the position and transcription start site (tss) of esrrb, respectively; the correlation between the methylation rate and esrrb expression for each region, with red shading in the curve corresponding to significant correlations (brighter red denotes higher significance) and the gray shaded area denoting the 95% confidence interval of the correlation coefficient; and the estimated weighted dna-methylation variance between cells. the two scatter plots at the top right depict the association between dna methylation at a p300 region (outlined in yellow) and at an lmr (outlined in blue) and esrrb expression. (c) gene-specific association analysis of correlations between dna methylation in different genomic contexts and gene expression in individual cells. shown are methylation-expression correlations for all variable genes in single cells, for each annotation, with the correlation obtained from matched rna-seq and bs-seq of a bulk cell population superimposed16 (orange circles). prom., promoter. upper and lower hinges correspond to 75th and 25th percentiles, upper and lower whiskers correspond to maximum and minimum values within the 1.5× interquartile range, and dots denote outliers.']. Reference sentences:[in escs that met scrna-seq quality-control criteria we detected transcripts from between 4000 and 8000 genes exceeding one transcript per million consistent with previ- ous measurements made using the method (additional scrna-seq quality metrics are shown in supplementary fig 2).next we tested for associations between the expression of individual genes and dna-methylation variation in several genomic contexts (online methods and supplementary table 2) and we identi- fied a total of 1493 associations (false discovery rate (fdr) < 10%; fig 2a and supplementary tables 3 and 4) which were robust when we used a bootstrapping approach to subsample the set of cells (supplementary fig 11).accordingly negative correlations between dna methylation and gene expression were predominant for non-cgi promoters whereas distal regulatory elements including low-methylation regions20 (lmrs) had a more even balance of positive and negative associations (fig 2a and supplementary fig 12 and 13).as an example the expression of esrrb a known hub gene in pluripotency networks22 negatively correlates with the methylation of several lmr and p300 sites overlapping ‘super- enhancers’ in the genomic neighborhood23 (fig 2b).we also found 516 genes whose expression correlated with the overall methylation level (fdr < 10%) indicating substantial links between transcriptional heterogeneity and global methylation levels (fig 2a).in addition to its utility in between-cell analyses scm&t-seq can be used to correlate the methylome and transcriptome between genes in individual cells (fig 2c and supplementary table 6).for the zoom-in plot in figure 2b we considered a sliding-window approach (3-kb windows with a step size of 1 kb) to estimate the methylation rate in consecutive regions.to correlate the methylation and expression of a single cell across genes (fig 2c) we filtered genes in the same way as described above and again used the weighted pearson correla- tion to test for associations.]
Correlations between DNA methylation and gene expression in different genomic contexts, including negative correlations at non-CGI promoters and positive/negative associations at distal regulatory elements.

Text 63
10.1016/j.celrep.2015.12.089
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 1. single-cell mrna-seq of mouse embryonic stem cells (a) the c1 (fluidigm) microﬂuidic system for single-cell capture and library generation. (b) protocol for the template-switch method (smarter kit; clontech) for global mrna amplification from single cells. (c) comparison of results from template-switching amplification method (smart) and sequence-specific amplification method (ssa) for single-cell mrna quantification. amplified single-cell cdnas were tested by qpcr using selected gene primers. expression level distributions are presented as violin plots. (d) bar chart depicts the number of expressed genes in each single-cell mrna-sequencing samples. (e) a scatterplot showing the correlation between j1 esc single-cell mrna-seq data and bulk-cell mrna-seq data. (f) a gene expression correlation heatmap from single-cell expression data reveals separation of different gene expression modules that reﬂect network heterogeneity in mouse esc culture.']. Reference sentences:[single escs were captured on a me- dium-sized (10–17 mm cell diameter) microﬂuidic rna-seq chip (fluidigm) using the fluidigm c1 system (figure 1a).whole-tran- scriptome-sequencing libraries were prepared using template switching-based amplification (figure 1b).from ampli- fied cdna we detected a bimodal distribution for id2 and sharp unimodal distribution for endogenous controls actb and gapdh (figure 1c).using this strategy we recover =9000 genes per cell (figure 1d).the average of single-cell mrna-seq profiles from escs showed high correlation with bulk mrna-seq profiles from the same cell line (figure 1e).by examining the expression correlation of key lineage regulators in the sin- gle-cell data we defined different gene modules that correlate with this heterogeneity (figure 1f).here using single-cell analysis we observed that many bivalent genes are in fact actively transcribed in a subset of cells and that the overall distribution is bimodal suggesting that the a b c d e f figure 1.]
Summary: Correlation patterns between single-cell and bulk-cell gene expressions reveal distinct gene modules in mouse ESC culture.

Text 64
10.1016/j.celrep.2015.12.089
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 4. external culture system affects esc network stability (a) motif analysis of most-variable genes predicts the roles of several important signaling pathways in regulating gene expression variability. (b) lle projection of single-cell analysis data from escs cultured with serum, knockout serum replacement, or 2i medium. (c) box plots for the expression distribution over the first pc reveal reduced gene variability in the 2i-medium-cultured escs. (d) violin plots showing expression level distribution of selected genes in escs cultured with serum, knockout serum replacement, or 2i medium. (e) 2i medium reduces bivalency in the list of mostvariable genes defined with serum-cultured escs. (f) correlation of single-cell-level gene expression variability and single-cell-level dna methylation variability in 2i and serum-cultured escs.']. Reference sentences:[we used the haystack pipeline (pinello et al. 2014) to identify enriched transcription factor motifs upstream of different groups of highly variable genes (figure 4a).on lle pro- jection of single-cell data global expression of 2i escs was more tightly distributed than that of escs cells cultured in serum or serum replacement (figure 4b).as revealed by violin plots in figure 4d the expression distribution of key regulators suggested a more-homogenous transcriptional network in 2i escs.we also found that among the most-variable genes defined in serum- cultured escs two-thirds of bivalent markers lost their bivalency in 2i conditions (figure 4e).interestingly we found a moderate correlation (r = 0.33; p value = 0.0016) between the difference in methylation variance and the difference in gene expression variance between serum and 2i conditions (figure 4f).]
Patterns related to gene expression variability and DNA methylation variability in different culture conditions.

Text 65
10.1016/j.celrep.2015.12.082
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 4. identification of new cell-type markers (a) t-sne plot of the rna-seq data from 363 egfp cells. points are colored based on the cluster the cells belong to. selected genes, whose expression is highly correlated with individual clusters, are shown next to each cluster. selected gene ontology terms associated with genes that are highly correlated with cluster 2 and the outlier cells are included. (b) expression of marker genes over pseudotime (left). points are colored based on the cluster the cells belong to. for each cluster, we show the proportion of cells expressing the gene at tpm > 1. expression of pairs of genes is shown on the right. points are colored based on the cluster the cells belong to. the side diagrams show the proportion of cells within the cluster expressing the gene at the given level of expression. (c) cell cycle analysis of three different populations of egfp cells. the gfplowsschigh cells are enriched for cells from clusters 1a/1b/2, gfplowssclow and gfphigh cells are enriched for cells from clusters 3 and 4, respectively. an average of two experiments is shown as a percentage of cells in g0 and g1 (g0/1) and s and g2 phase (s/g2) ± sem. (d) distribution of fsc (top) and ssc (bottom) values in the different clusters. in particular, one can see that the small population of outliers (cluster x, shaded gray) has higher fsc and ssc values than cells from other clusters. see also figures s4 and s5.']. Reference sentences:[among the numerous newly identified cell-type markers (table s1) we found several of particular interest (figure 4a).ccr9a is a member of the beta chemokine receptor family and is known to be expressed in hscs (wright et al. 2002); our data show that ccr9a expression is highly correlated with cluster 1a (figure 4b).transcription elongation factor a (sii) tcea3 was specifically ex- pressed in cluster 1b (figure 4b).cells from cluster 1b can also be sorted by combining expression of plasminogen receptor gene (plgrkt) and ascc1 (figure 4b).cell reports 14 966–977 february 2 2016 ª2016 the authors 969 condensation and chromatid separation (downes et al. 1994) (figure 4b).interestingly the overrepresented gene ontology (go) enrichment terms for cluster 2 included cell division and cell cycle (figure 4a) suggesting that an expansion phase precedes lineage commitment and terminal differentiation of thrombocytes.the combined cells from clusters 1a/1b/2 had a significantly higher proportion of cells in s and g2/m phase compared to clusters 3 and 4 (figure 4c) validating our finding that these cells prolif- erate faster.additional markers for cluster 3 included combined high expression of fzd8b and no expression of mibp (figure 4b).go enrichment analysis of their marker genes yielded only three statistically significant go terms all linked with immunity (figure 4a).furthermore compared to all other cells the outlier cells had remarkably high fsc and ssc values charac- teristic of macrophages (figure 4d).we concluded therefore that the thrombocytes exit the kidney a c d b figure 4.]
Patterns related to correlation between gene expression and cell clusters, pseudotime, cell cycle, and cell characteristics in single-cell data.

Text 66
10.1016/j.celrep.2015.12.082
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 2. ordering of cells through the developmental trajectory (a) we inferred a smooth progression over the developmental lineage, represented as pseudotime, using two different methods. here we demonstrate the path of both pseudotimes by regressing them into a t-sne plot of the data. points are colored based on the cluster the cells belong to. (b) the pseudotime inferred with two different methods correlate very strongly (spearman correlation 0.97). (c) expression of cd41 mrna (top), gfp mrna (middle), and gfp ﬂuorescence (bottom) shown in pseudotime. each point represents an individual cell; points are colored based on the cluster the cells belong to. see also figure s3.']. Reference sentences:[comparing the paths these orderings take when regressed into the t-sne depiction one can appreciate the similarity between them (figure 2a).the two pseudotime orderings agreed very strongly (spearman correlation 0.97; figure 2b) giving us confidence in our method.when presented in pseudotime the expression of endoge- nous cd41 (also known as itga2b) and egfp as well as egfp ﬂuorescence recorded during sorting were highly correlated and showed an expected increase through pseudotime (spearman rho 0.85 0.80 and 0.82 respectively) (figure 2c).good marker genes for clus- ter 2 included e2f8 which encodes a protein involved in progres- sion through the cell cycle (deng et al. 2010) and top2a a dna topoisomerase involved in processes such as chromosome a b c figure 2.without any information about the egfp expression the bayesiangplvm recovers our original ordering up to orientation (spearman correlation 0.97; figure 2b) (notebook 7 in data s2).we can depict the inferred pseudotime by regressing it into the two-dimen- sional tsne space (figure 2a) and can see how well the two methods of con- structing pseudotime agrees.]
Summary: Strong correlation between two pseudotime methods, shown by ordering of cells in developmental trajectory and gene expression patterns across pseudotime.

Text 67
10.1038/ni.3368
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 3 protein-versus-rna correlations. (a) nkp44 mean fluorescence intensity (mfi) versus ncr2 mrna expression for all cells (as in fig 1; n = 648); results normalized with greatest value set as 1. spearman correlation: r = 0.63. (b) protein intensity versus mrna expression, presented as mean in all cells for each gene (n = 7; protein designations in plot)). spearman correlation: r = 0.93. (c) correlation between protein expression and mrna expression for a subsampling of cells (1,000 iterations). data are from three independent experiments with one donor each (error bars (c), s.d.).']. Reference sentences:[]
Summary: Correlation between protein and mRNA expression levels in single cells, with strong positive correlation (r = 0.93) observed.

Text 68
10.1038/cr.2016.23
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 2 the relationships between dna methylation and gene expression in single cells. the pearson correlations between dna methylation and gene expression are calculated in different regions on gene body (from tss to tes) and their 15-kb flanking regions in sctrio-seq data of hepg2 cells.']. Reference sentences:[we next used sctrio-seq data to explore the relationship between methylation and gene expression in individual cells and found a similar negative correlation between promoter dna methylation and the expression level of the corresponding gene in each hepg2 cell (figure 2 and supplementary information figure s4b).moreover dna methylation in the gene body (excluding promoter regions) showed a positive correlation with gene expression (figure 2).]
Summary: Correlations between DNA methylation and gene expression in single cells, showing negative correlation at promoters and positive correlation in gene bodies.

Text 69
10.1016/j.devcel.2016.02.020
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 3. spatial transcriptome uncovers gene markers for different expression domains (a) the heatmap of clustering analysis of marker genes. the samples are clustered by k-means (k = 4), and the marker genes are clustered by bic-skmeans. (b) principal component analysis (pca) of all cell samples and their projections on pc1 and pc2. pc1 discriminates between the anterior and the posterior samples, and pc2 between the proximal lateral samples and the others. (c) pc projections showing the contribution of each gene to the first two pcs. the arrow tips indicate the correlation coefficient of the respective genes with each principal component. mixl1, mesp1, t represent the posterior enrichment. pou3f1 and utf1 indicate an anterior enrichment. cxcl12 and lars2 denote the correlation with the proximal lateral population. only genes with cosine correlation >0.8 or >0.55 for the purple genes are shown. (d) wish validation (upper panels) of newly identified region-specific genes against the d-wish data presented in corn plots (lower panels). anterior, cbx7, cldn7, uchl1, sall2, utf1, slc7a3, and zfp462; posterior, ccnd2, sall3, and sp5. see also figure s3 and table s2.']. Reference sentences:[pca analysis of these pca loading genes (table s2) showed that they constituted four sample groups (figure 3b) and four distinct gene groups (figure 3c).on the basis of co-expression with known markers (anterior epiblast sox2; posterior epiblast mixl1 t and mesp1) two gene groups were identified on the pc1 axis for the anterior and posterior regions of the epiblast (figure 3c) and contained within each group were domain-spe- cific signature genes.on the pc2 axis two gene groups were differentially ex- pressed in anterior/posterior (d1/d4) and proximal lateral do- mains (d3) (figure 3c).to do this −5 0 5 10 −8 −6 −4 −2 0 2 pc 1 (54.41%) pc 2 (17.98%) 1a 1p 2a 2p 2l 2r 3a 3p 3l 3r 4a 4p 4l 4r 5a 5p 5l 5r 6a 6p 6l 6r 7a 7p 7l 7r 8a 8p 8l8r 9a 9p 9l 9r 10a 10p 10l 10r 11a 11p 11l 11r a l p r                                          a (d1) l (d2/d3) p (d4) r (d2/d3) −0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 −0.4 −0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 pc 1 (54.41%) pc 2 (17.98%) bccip cdca4 cdh11 cnbp cops6 dlc1 eif2b1 fn1 frzb gemin6 grb7 mesp1 mesp2 mixl1 nkd1 pcdh1 pmpcb pou3f1 prtg sall3 slc7a3 snai1 sp5 syt11 t utf1 zfp462 lars2cxcl12comt grik5 a cldn7 a l r p 87654321 9 10 11 cldn7 uchl1 a l r p 87654321 9 10 11 uchl1 sall2 a l r p 87654321 9 10 11 sall2 utf1 a l r p 87654321 9 10 11 utf1 sall3 a l r p 87654321 9 10 11 sall3 sp5 a l r p 87654321 9 10 11 sp5 p a cbx7 a l r p 87654321 9 10 11 cbx7 ccnd2 a l r p 87654321 9 10 11 ccnd2 b c d slc7a3 zfp462 a l r p 87654321 9 10 11 zfp462 a l r p 87654321 9 10 11 slc7a3 10a 9a 8a 7a 6a 5a 4a 3a 2a 1a 2l 2r 3l 3r 4l 4r 5l 5r 6l 6r 7l 7r 8l 8r 9l 9r 10l 10r 11a 11l 11r 11p 10p 9p 8p 7p 6p 5p 4p 3p 2p 1p mg3 ( g3) mg2 ( g2) mg1 ( g1) mg4 md1 ( d1) md2 ( d2) md3 ( d3) md4 ( d4) figure 3.]
Patterns related to correlation between genes and cell populations are shown, with specific genes correlating with different cell domains.

Text 70
10.1016/j.cell.2016.01.047
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 1. cellular heterogeneity in overall gene expression patterns (a) scheme of development from the fertilized egg (zygote) to the blastocyst stage with three lineages: epiblast (epi; blue), primitive endoderm (pe, red), and trophectoderm (te, green). the mechanism(s) initiating these cell-fate decisions remains unknown (reviewed in zernicka-goetz et al., 2009). (b) principal component analysis of the gene expression patterns of single cells at different stages. the percentage of variance explained by each principal component is indicated in parentheses. (c) spearman correlation coefficients of blastomeres within the same embryo (intra-embryonic) and in different embryos (inter-embryonic) at the 2-, 4-, and 8-cell stage. asterisks indicate statistically significant differences (welch’s t test). (d) venn diagram with the number of genes having a significantly high degree of heterogeneous expression at 2-, 4-, and 8-cell stages. (e) principal component analysis of the transcriptomes of cells from embryos at the 4-cell stage with different division patterns: me, six embryos; em, six embryos; mm, three embryos; ee, one embryo. m, meridional; e, equatorial cell division. see also figures s1, s2, s3, and s4, tables s1 and s2, and data s1.']. Reference sentences:[transcriptomes were determined for all blasto- meres of 28 embryos isolated at the 2-cell (n = 8) 4-cell (n = 16) and 8-cell (n = 4) stages and for individual cells at the 16-cell (n = 6) and 32-cell (n = 6) stages corresponding to the morula and blastocyst respectively (figure 1a; table s1).when we applied pca to the log-transformed normalized read counts of highly variable genes from all cells analyzed the cells grouped by develop- mental stage (figure 1b; experimental procedures) in accord with previous results (deng et al. 2014; tang et al. 2011; xue et al. 2013).we found that intra-embryonic correlation was significantly higher than the inter-embryonic cor- relation for 2- and 4-cell embryos while at the 8-cell stage no statistically significant difference could be identified (figure 1c; welch’s t test p values are 8.5 3 10=5 5.9 3 10=7 and 0.74 for the 2- 4- and 8-cell stage respectively).of these variable genes 47 showed heterogeneous expres- sion at all three stages (table s2) 82 are shared between the 2- and the 4-cell stage 203 between the 4- and the 8-cell stage and 31 between the 2- and the 8-cell stage (figure 1d).pca anal- ysis of 16 4-cell embryos revealed that embryos with distinct cell division patterns align approximately along the first principal component (figure 1e; figure s4).a b d c e figure 1.]
Patterns of correlation between blastomeres within and between embryos at different developmental stages.

Text 71
10.1016/j.cell.2016.01.047
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 2. heterogeneous expression of oct4 and sox2 target genes at the 4-cell stage (a) to find highly variable genes, we used the parameterization cv2 = a1/m + a0 to fit the relationship between the square of the coefficient of variation, cv2, and the average expression level m (green continuous curve; see experimental procedures for further details). all highly variable genes (with an adjusted p value < 0.1) marked by red circles. sox21, cyan circle. (a0) the same information from (a) but with oct4 and/or sox2 targets indicated (diamonds mark shared sox2 and oct4 targets, squares mark oct4 targets, and triangles mark sox2 targets). gray symbols mark oct4 and/or sox2 targets that are not variable and blue symbols mark oct4 and/or sox2 targets that are highly variable at the 4-cell stage. sox21 is marked in gold. (b) heatmap showing the spearman correlation coefficient among highly variable oct4 and/or sox2 targets. a dynamic tree cut algorithm identified two clusters of genes showing similar patterns of correlations (colored side bars; experimental procedures). see also figure s5.']. Reference sentences:[one of the most highly heterogeneous genes in all embryos analyzed at the 4-cell stage is the gene encoding the transcription factor sox21 (figure 2a) which is involved in regulating es cell-fate downstream of sox2 (kuzmichev et al. 2012; mallanna et al. 2010).cell 165 61–74 march 24 2016 ª2016 the authors 63 we applied fisher’s exact test to a list of oct4/sox2 down- stream target genes (experimental procedures) and found that they are indeed overrepresented in the set of highly variable genes at the 4-cell stage (p value 3 3 10=10; figure 2a0).this cellular heterogeneity in sox21 expression was confirmed at the a b a’ figure 2.]
Patterns of correlation among highly variable oct4 and/or sox2 target genes, forming two clusters with similar correlation patterns.

Text 72
10.1126/science.aad0501
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 5. activation-dependent and -independent variation in t cell exhaustion markers. (a) single t cell stratification into cd4+ and cd8+ cells (top panel), cd25+foxp3+ and other cd4 cells (middle panel), and their inferred activation state [lower panels, from average expression of the cytotoxic and naïve gene sets in (b)]. th, t helper cells; tregs; regulatory t cells. (b) (top) average expression of markers of cytotoxicity (cyto.), exhaustion (exhau.), and naïve cell states (rows) in (from left to right) tregs, cd4+ t helper cells, and cd8+ t cells. cd4+ and cd8+ t cells are each further divided into five bins by their cytotoxic score (ratio of cytotoxic to naïve marker expression levels), showing activation-dependent coexpression of exhaustion markers. (bottom) proportion of cycling cells (calculated as in fig 2b). asterisks denote significant enrichment or depletion of cycling cells in a specific subset, as compared with the corresponding set of cd4+ or cd8+ t cells (p < 0.05, hypergeometric test). (c) if analysis of pd-1 (top, green),tim-3 (middle, red), and their overlay (bottom) validates their coexpression. (d) activationindependent variation in exhaustion states within highly cytotoxic t cells. the scatter plot shows the cytotoxic score (x axis) and exhaustion score (y axis, average expression of the mel75 exhaustion program as in fig s21) of each cd8+ t cell from mel75. in addition to the overall correlation between cytotoxicity and exhaustion, the cytotoxic cells can be subdivided into cells with high (red) and low exhaustion (green), based on comparison to a lowess (locally weighted scatter plot smoothing) regression (black line).']. Reference sentences:[naïve 0 2 4 6 expression log-ratio (high vs. low exhaustion) 0 2 4 expression cycling (%) –5 0 5 0 10 5 cd8+ t-cells cd4+ th cells melanoma tumors ctla4 lag3 −4 −2 0 2 75 79 89 74 58 75melanoma tumors 79 89 74 58 −4 −2 0 2 0 20 40 60 80 100 mel75 cells (%) −1 0 1 relative frequency (log2−ratio) 1−4 5−6 >6 tcr−cluster size 1−4 5−6 >6 tcr−cluster size 200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400 1600 1800 2000 cd2/3 cd4 cd8 100 200 300 400 500 foxp3 cd25 100 200 300 400 naïve cyto 200 400 600 800 1000 naïve cyto activation activation tim-3 pd-1 + tim-3 pd-1 mel75 nfatc1 tim3 pd-1 btla cblb expected observed low exhaustion mid/high exhaustion fig 5.we identified t cells and their main subsets [cd4+ regulatory t cells (tregs) and cd8+] on the basis of the expression levels of their respective defin- ing surface markers (fig 5a top and table s12).within both the cd4+ and cd8+ populations a pca distinguished cell subsets and heterogene- ity of activation states on the basis of the expres- sion of naïve and cytotoxic t cell genes (fig 5 a and b and fig s19).in several cases these coinhibitory receptors were coexpressed across individual cells; we validated this phenomenon for pd1 and tim3 by if staining (fig 5c).however exhaustion gene expression was also highly correlated with the expression of both cytotoxicity markers and overall t cell activation states (fig 5b).an exhaustion state was defined as high or low expression of the exhaustion program rela- tive to that of the cytotoxicity genes (fig 5d) (17).our core exhaustion signature yielded 28 genes that were consistently up-regulated in high-exhaustion cells of most tumors including coinhibitory (tigit) and costimulatory (tnfrsf9/ 4-1bb and cd27) receptors (fig 5e and table s14).in addition most genes that were significantly up-regulated in high-exhaustion cells of at least one tumor had distinct associations with exhaus- tion across the different tumors (fig 5f 272 of 300 genes with p < 0.001 by permutation test; fig s22 a and b; and table s14).interestingly mel58 was derived from a patient with an ini- tial response and subsequent development of resistance to ctla-4 blockade with ipilimumab (fig 5f and fig s22c).however approximately half of the cd8+ t cells in mel75 had one of the seven en- riched combinations identified (fdr = 0.005) and thus may represent expanded t cell clones (fig 5g and fig s23).this putative t cell expansion was also linked to exhaustion (fig 5h) such that low-exhaustion t cells were depleted in expanded t cells (tcr clusters with more than six cells) and enriched in nonexpanded t cells (tcr clus- ters with one to four cells).in particular the nonexhausted cytotoxic cells are almost all non- expanded cells (fig 5h).]
Correlation between cytotoxicity and exhaustion states in single T cells, with subsets showing activation-dependent coexpression of exhaustion markers.

Text 73
10.1126/science.aad0501
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 4. deconvolution of bulk melanoma profiles reveals cell-to-cell interactions. (a) bulk tumors segregate to distinct clusters on the basis of their inferred cell type composition. (top panel) heat map showing the relative expression of gene sets defined from single-cell rna-seq, as specific to each of five cell types from the tumor microenvironment (y axis) across 471 melanoma tcga bulk-rna signatures (x axis). each column represents one tumor, and tumors are partitioned into 10 distinct patterns identified by k-means clustering (vertical lines and cluster numbers at the top). endo, endothelial cells; macro., macrophages. (lower panels, from top to bottom) tumor purity estimated by absolute (dna) and rna-seq analysis (rna), specimen location (from tcga), and axl/mitf scores. tumors with a high abundance of cafs are correlated with an increased ratio of axl-to-mitf expression (bottom). ln, lymph node. (b) inferred cell-to-cell interactions between cafs and t cells. the scatter plot compares, for each gene (circle), the correlation of its expression with inferred t cell abundance across bulk']. Reference sentences:[with t−cell abundance (from tcga) dna rna –5 0 5 t-cell genes caf genes higher in cafs higher in t-cells immune modulators expression log-ratio 0 10 20 30 0 5 10 15 20 25 –0.6 –0.4 –0.2 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 cancer types tissue types tcga gtex complement vs. t-cell correlation cd8 signal (% area) c3 signal (% area) c d location ln primary melanoma (n = 80) normal (n = 10) distant cutaneous –2 0 2 0.4 0.60.8 1 expression log-ratio purity < –0.2 < 0 > 0 > 0.2 > 0.4 > 0.6 < –0.2 < 0 > 0 > 0.2 > 0.4 > 0.6 fig 4.next we used these signatures to infer the relative abundance of those cell types in a larger com- pendium of tumors (17) (fig 4a and fig s13).we found a strong correlation (correlation coefficient r ~ 0.8) between our estimated tumor purity and that predicted from dna analysis (37) (fig 4a first lane below the heat map).we partitioned 471 tumors from tcga into 10 distinct microenvironment clusters on the basis of their inferred cell type composition (fig 4a).clusters were mostly independent of the site of metastasis (fig 4a second lane) with some exceptions (e.g. clusters 8 and 9).in particular caf abundance is predictive of the axl-mitf distinction with caf-rich tu- mors expressing the axl-high signature (fig 4a bottom lane).we identified a set of caf-expressed genes that cor- related strongly with t cell infiltration (fig 4b red circles).we performed dual if stain- ing and quantitative slide analysis of two tissue microarrays with a total of 308 core biopsies including primary tumors metastatic lesions normal skin with adjacent tumor and healthy skin controls (fig 4c and fig s18) (17).to test the generalizability of the association between caf-derived complement factors with t cell in- filtration we expanded our analysis to bulk rna- seq data sets across all tcga cancer types (fig 4d).]
Patterns of correlation between gene expressions related to cell types in tumor microenvironment, particularly between cafs and t cells.

Text 74
10.1016/j.cell.2016.03.023
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 5. dosage compensation of the x chromosome during preimplantation development (a) distribution of spearman correlations between gene-expression levels and embryonic day (e4–e7) in female and male cells, for genes located on the x chromosome or autosomes. p values, two-sided mww. (b–e) boxplots of female-to-male expression-level ratios of transcribed x chromosome genes, shown for all cells (b) or specific for the te (c), epi (d), and pe (e) lineages. lines intersecting the medians indicate the trend for x chromosome genes, and the green dotted lines around the 1.0-ratio similarly illustrate the medians for autosomal genes. values above the boxplots denote p values (two-sided mww), either indicating a significant difference between male and female cells from the same embryonic day (green p values; deviation from one at e3 or e4), or a significant reduction between e4 and a later embryonic day (blue p values). (f) boxplots showing the distribution of cellular x chromosome rpkm sums for each sex and embryonic day, using a fixed gene set. p value, two-sided mww. (g) female-to-male moving expression average along the x chromosome using a 25-nearest-genes window, shown for the stages beyond zga completion (e4–e7), and the same for two autosomal chromosomes included for comparison. the ticks below the moving-average lines show the locations of expressed genes included in the estimates, colored according to embryonic day.']. Reference sentences:[spearman correlations between expression level and embryonic time were negative for most x-linked genes in female cells but not in male cells (figure 5a; p = 1.3e=7 female versus male mww) and not for autosomal genes (p > 0.05).this equilibration of female and male expression was not a result of transcriptional upregulation in males since the total x chro- mosome output per cell remained nearly constant in males but distinctly dropped between e4 and e7 in females (figure 5f; p = 6.8e=45 mww).as expected autosomes serving as negative controls showed equivalent expression in male and female cells (figure 5g).this is dependent on chromosomal region and whether expression- ratios of individual genes (figures 5b–5e) or the total x chromo- some expression output (figure 5f) is considered.we also detected sporadic xist expression in male cells although at substantially (=15-fold) lower levels (figure 5h; p = 3.1e=3 to 1.9e=50 mww).]
Summary: Correlation between gene expression and embryonic time differs between sexes for X-linked genes, with no significant difference for autosomal genes.

Text 75
10.1016/j.cell.2016.03.023
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 1. single-cell rna-seq transcriptome profiling of human preimplantation embryos (a) left: quality of single-cell rna-seq experiments assessed as nearestneighbor similarities between cells (maximum spearman correlation per cell, using all cell-pairs and all genes). right: histogram of the number of expressed genes per cell. genes with rpkm r1 were considered expressed. the histograms were smoothed using a gaussian kernel. (b) number of embryos and cells per embryonic day (e3–e7) retained after quality filtering. (c) expression-level boxplots for ubiquitously expressed y chromosome genes in male cells, normalized to the median in stage e4–e7. p value, twosided mww. (d) boxplots showing the fraction transcribed snps detected as biallelically expressed in male cells, shown for chromosome x and 1. p value, two-sided mww.']. Reference sentences:[after quality control we retained 1529 high-quality single-cell transcriptomes from 88 embryos with an average of 8500 expressed genes (reads per kilobase of transcript per million mapped reads [rpkm] r1; spearman’s r r0.63; figure 1a).a total of 13 to 24 embryos and 81 to 466 cells were analyzed per embryonic day (figure 1b).to first study the maternal to zygotic transition we assessed the activity of ubiquitously expressed y chromosome genes (i.e. genes exclusively derived from the paternal germline) and found an increase between e3 and e4 (figure 1c; p = 8.7e=22 mann-whitney-wilcoxon test [mww]).furthermore by detection a b c e f d figure 1.(f) a pseudo-time was assigned to each cell by fitting a principal curve to the cells in the two-dimensional t-sne subspace (figure 1e).to further refine the resolution of the developmental timing of each individual cell we fitted a principal curve (hastie and stuetzle 1989) to the cells in a t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding (t-sne) subspace (van der maaten and hinton 2008) (figure 1f) and assigned a pseudo-time to each cell based on its projection onto this curve which we utilized in parts of the temporal analysis.lineage segregation of cells into inner cell mass trophectoderm epiblast and primitive endoderm (a) t-sne plot of all cells as in figure 1e showing icm and te assignment of cells.the x axis indicates pseudo-time as determined in figure 1f.]
Summary: Correlation patterns in gene expression, allele expression, and developmental timing across single cells in human preimplantation embryos.

Text 76
10.1186/s13059-016-0945-9
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 3 identification of targetable signaling pathways by transcriptome profiling and drug screening. a quantitative estimation of the activation status of targetable signaling pathways across single cells. boxplots demonstrate overall reciprocal differences in expression signatures across normal kidney cortex, bulk cells of each population, and single cells. b measured drug response profiles of prcc and mrcc cells, matched to the targetable signaling pathways. sensitivities of cells to various targeted drugs were determined based on the half-maximal inhibitory concentration (ic50), and transformed to z-scores. afatinib and dasatinib were selected as the most effective drugs against mrcc cells (denoted as ) whereas everolimus and pazopanib (denoted as †) showed no effects, which is consistent with clinical findings. c–e drug sensitivity was predicted by the ridge regression model using a training set of publicly available cancer cell line expression data with each of the measured ic50 data. estimated values were transformed to z-scores across samples. c significant correlation of predicted drug sensitivity with measured sensitivity in b. d comparison of the predicted drug sensitivity of afatinib and dasatinib between populations. e for the selected drugs afatinib and dasatinib, there was a significant correlation between predicted drug sensitivity (z-scores) and activation status (gsva scores) of the relevant targeted pathways. c, e linear regression was applied to estimate pearson’s correlation coefficient (r), with 95 % confidence as shown by thicker light gray curves. the statistical significance of the regression was determined by one-way anova test. a, d boxes show 25th to 75th percentile with 10th and 90th percentile whiskers. p <0.05, p <0.01, p <0.001, two-tailed student’s t-test']. Reference sentences:[many drug target pathways were differentially regulated in the two pdx tumor cell groups (fig 3a and additional file 13: figure s10) suggesting differential drug sensitivity.we subsequently screened the pdx-mrcc and pdx- prcc cells with a panel of targeted agents (fig 3b and additional file 14: table s4).for the pdx- mrcc and prcc bulk cell population samples we found strong positive correlations between predicted and mea- sured drug sensitivity (fig 3c).drug sensitivity was also estimated in all single cancer cells and in normal kidney cortex as a control; these data suggested afatinib and dasatinib sensitivity of prcc cells (fig 3d) similar to the predicted and measured drug sensitivity of bulk cell popu- lations (fig 3b).the prediction of drug sensitivity by the ridge regression model was in agreement with the estima- tion of drug target pathway activation across single cells (fig 3e and additional file 16: figure s12).interestingly pazopanib and everolimus which showed no clinical benefit in this patient (fig 1a) had minor effects on the viability of pdx-prcc and pdx-mrcc cells (fig 3b and additional file 17: figure s13) and signaling path- way activation for their targets mtor and vegfr also remained low (fig 3a and additional file 13: figure s10).in drug sensitivity predic- tion and screens pdx-mrcc cells showed the highest sensitivity to afatinib and dasatinib among the various drugs tested (fig 3b).at the single-cell level pdx-mrcc showed extensive heterogeneity in the activation status of the egfr and src pathways (fig 3a and additional file 13: figure s10).on the basis of transcriptome pro- filing and high-throughput drug screening (fig 3) we first measured the growth inhibitory effects of afatinib and dasatinib (fig 5a) in a two-dimensional (2d) culture system.in contrast to susceptibility to afatinib or dasatinib at a dose concentration of 0.5 μm (fig 3d) we did not detect significant anticancer activity of pazopanib or everolimus even at higher dose concentrations.although the absolute correlation coefficient (r) was mostly high across all comparisons some showed an insignificant correlation due to the small size of samples involved in the statistical test compared to the overall significant correlation in unclassified single-cell populations (fig 3).]
Patterns of drug sensitivity correlated with predicted sensitivity and pathway activation across single cells.

Text 77
10.1186/s13059-016-0945-9
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 1 profiling transcriptome of paired prcc and mrcc at single-cell resolution. a brief description of clinical course in a patient with metastatic rcc. b schematic of scrna-seq experiments from establishment of the patient-derived xenograft model to discovery of targetable subpopulations. c hierarchical clustering heatmap and dendrogram based on inter-correlation of centroid global expression profiles across kidney cortex normal, bulk cells of each population, and single cells using euclidean distance metric and average linkage. d principal component analysis (pca) of single-cellresolved gene expression profiles based on the first two principal components. ellipses represent 95 % confidence around each group']. Reference sentences:[single-cell rna sequencing and quality assessment for expression profiling to model the functional heterogeneity and to identify specific subpopulations that are phenotypically relevant to drug responses we used scrna-seq to profile single cells from the parental mrcc and pdx mrcc and prcc (fig 1b and see “methods”).interestingly the global expression profiles of patient-mrcc and pdx-mrcc single-cell samples were more closely related than those of pdx-prcc samples (fig 1c and additional file 10: figure s7).principal com- ponent analysis (pca) across all samples showed three distinctive main clusters (fig 1d); in addition to a cluster of normal kidney cortex a cluster of parental mrcc cells and pdx samples were separated from a cluster of pdx-prcc samples.as identified in unsupervised clus- tering of global expression across samples (fig 1c) we found the averaged expression of single cells correlated well with that of their bulk cell population samples (additional file 10: figure s7b).similarly in the pca plot bulk cell population samples almost matched single cells (fig 1d).metastatic and aggressive molecular signatures in mrcc transcriptomes consistent with the previous observation that pdx cells reflect their parental tumors with rare contamination of normal stromal cells [24] we verified discrete global expression profiles of single rcc cells compared with normal kidney expression profiles (fig 1c d additional file 9: figure s6 and additional file 10: figure s7).in the virtual space of the pca plot (fig 1d) the emt-induced signature was enriched both in patient-mrcc and pdx-mrcc samples compared to pdx-prcc samples (additional file 11: figure s8a) with statistical significance (additional file 11: figure s8b).a c positions of each dot and ellipse in fig 1d were fixed and then each dot was colored (main panel) and indicated as drop lines (top and right panels) according to the estimated status for the given signatures.interestingly pazopanib and everolimus which showed no clinical benefit in this patient (fig 1a) had minor effects on the viability of pdx-prcc and pdx-mrcc cells (fig 3b and additional file 17: figure s13) and signaling path- way activation for their targets mtor and vegfr also remained low (fig 3a and additional file 13: figure s10).a positions of each dot and ellipse in fig 1d were fixed and then each dot was colored (main panel) and indicated as drop lines (top and right panels) according to the estimated activation status in the emt-induced signature.positions of each dot and ellipses were derived from the pca analysis in fig 1d.]
Patterns of correlation in gene expression profiles across different cell populations, reflecting functional heterogeneity and drug responses.

Text 78
10.1186/s13059-016-0957-5
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 5 model validation in vitro and in vivo. a cell culture expression time course: correlations of gene expression levels (logrpkm) between the model prediction and measured data at 6, 18, 24, 48 and 84 h. the colour scale represents the density of transcripts as a percentage of all expressed genes. b pearson correlation between model-predicted expression values (thick light blue line) and generation profiles (thin lines, grey for g0n, red for g2n, orange for g4n and green for g4p). c for each of the states, the linear regression of the median values (z-score normalized) is visualized as a red line for the time-course data and as a blue line for the predicted ones. errors were calculated using data from different rna-seq replicates. d overview of splenic th cells isolated from pcas pbtii-infected mice at 2, 3 and 4 days post-infection. e cumulative expression levels of cell cycle-associated genes (cyclebase) and th1 signature genes [23] in single cd4+ t cells as tpm (transcripts per millions). cells from different days are plotted with different colours. the p value was calculated using the cor.test function in r, based on the spearman’s product moment correlation coefficient. f the cumulative expression of 251 cell cycle-associated genes as tpm (cyclebase database) in ifng high cells and in cells expressing low levels of or no ifng. the p value was calculated using a wilcoxon rank sum test']. Reference sentences:[we an- alyzed the expression profiles of all the genes at all time points and plotted the predicted versus the measured log(rpkm) values (fig 5a).then we calculated the correlations between the single generation datasets the model prediction and the new time-course data (fig 5b).linear regression on the median expression (fig 5c) for the predicted and the experimentally determined data be- have similarly suggesting that our predictions fit well for all three states across all time points.overall the excellent agreement between the predicted and the measured rpkm values (fig 5a–c) shows that our model is accurate in terms of transcriptomic changes in th2 differentiation.antigen-specific pbtii cd4+ t cells (cd45.1) were trans- ferred into wild-type cd45.2 recipients and recovered from spleens at days 2 3 and 4 post-infection (fig 5d).these single-cell transcriptomics data and bioinfor- matics analysis supports an increase in proliferation in more mature differentiated cells in vivo as highlighted by the correlation between th1 differentiation and cell cycle score (fig 5e).]
Summary: Correlations of gene expression levels and cell cycle-associated genes in single cells at different time points and states were analyzed.

Text 79
10.1038/nature18323
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 3 | in cell maturation competes with an alternative myogenic cell fate that is repressed by brn2 and myt1l. a, tsne reveals alternative cell fates that emerge during direct reprogramming. shapes and colours indicate the day 20/22 ascl1-only (dark green) or day 22 bam-induced (blue) cells. note that all cells are tau–egfp+. b, c, tsne plot from a with cells coloured based on expression level of marker genes (b), or correlation with bulk rna-seq data from different purified cell types (neurons24, myocytes25, fibroblasts13; c). d, heat map showing expression of genes marking the two alternative fates in day 20/22 ascl1-only (upper sidebar, dark green) and day 22 bam (upper sidebar, blue) tau–egfp+ cells. genes (rows) have the highest positive and negative correlation with the first principal component in a pca analysis on all day 20/22 cells and all genes. columns represent 121 single cells, ordered based on their correlation coefficient with the first principal component. lower sidebars, ascl1 transcript level and tau–egfp fluorescence for each cell. e, immunofluorescent detection of tau–egfp (green), dapi (blue), myh3 (red) and tubb3 (cyan) for day 22 cells infected with ascl1 alone, or with all bam factors. images are representative of four biological replicates. right, mean fractions of egfp+ cells that express either tubb3 or myh3. only tubb3+ cells with a neuronal morphology were counted. six or seven images were analysed for each of four biological replicates. error bars, s.e.m.']. Reference sentences:[nevertheless these clonal mefs had similar transcriptional responses and heterogeneity as primary infected mefs at the day 2 time point as well as comparable reprogramming efficiencies and maturation (extended data fig 3a).finally we compared the early response in our ascl1-only single-cell rna-seq data with our previously reported bulk rna-seq data of ascl1-only and bam-mediated reprogramming13 (extended data fig 3b).we identified 3 clusters which contained cells expressing neuron (syp) fibroblast (eln) or myocyte (tnnc2) marker genes respectively (fig 3b).consistent with this marker gene expression cells in each cluster had a maximum correlation with bulk rna-seq data from purified neurons embryonic fibroblasts or myocytes (fig 3c).neuron- and myocyte-like cells expressed a clear signature of each cell type (fig 3d).although we observed cells with complex neuronal morphologies in the ascl1-only reprogramming experiments as we had reported previously14 (fig 3e) their frequency was too low to be captured in the single-cell rna-seq experiments.to directly address this question we infected mefs with ascl1 alone or in combination with brn2 and/or myt1l and assessed myogenic and neurogenic fates at day 22 based on immunostaining and qrt–pcr (fig 3e extended data fig 6f–i).the seurat package3940 implemented in r was used to identify distinct cell populations present at d22 of ascl1-only and bam reprogramming (fig 3a–d).to further estimate the identity of each cell on the tsne plot we colour coded cells based on pearson correlation of each single cell’s expression profile with the expression profile of bulk cortical neurons1324 myocytes25 and mefs13 (fig 3).we used pearson correlation of each single cell expression profile with the expression profile of bulk cortical neurons1324 myocytes25 and mefs13 to further estimate the identity of each single cell and to estimate when alternative fates emerge (fig 3c extended data fig 6d e).all rights reserved letter research extended data figure 3 | clonal mefs reprogram successfully into in cells and ascl1-only and bam induce similar responses during early in cell reprogramming.see fig 3e for respective data for cells infected with ascl1-only or all three bam factors.]
Patterns related to correlation between single-cell expression profiles and bulk RNA-seq data from different cell types are shown.

Text 80
10.1038/nature18323
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 4 | reconstructing the direct reprogramming path from mefs to in cells. a, top, for each cell on the in cell reprogramming path, the similarity to bulk rna-seq from either mefs13 or neurons24 was calculated using quadratic programming and plotted as fractional identities (left axis, circle, fractional mef identity; right axis, triangle, fractional neuron identity). points are coloured based on the experimental time point. bottom, lagrangian residuals of the quadratic programming for each single cell ordered based on their fractional identity as above. points are coloured based on the experimental time point. b, fractional neuron identities of all cells on the in cell reprogramming path are shown as a function of the experimental time point. c, ordering of single cells (rows) according to fractional neuron identity revealed a cascade of gene expression changes leading to neuronal identity. genes (columns) with the highest positive and negative correlation to pc1 and pc2 are shown. left sidebars, experimental time point (green/blue) and fractional neuron']. Reference sentences:[we found that tau–egfp− cells lacked expression of neuronal ascl1-target genes (genes b) and maintained expression of fibroblast-associated genes (genes a and c; fig 2a b extended data fig 4a supplementary data 4).in addition we found a positive correlation (r2 = 0.49) between ascl1 expres- sion and tau–egfp intensities (extended data fig 4b fig 2a b).we found that transgenic ascl1 protein levels varied substantially over time and on average contin- ued to increase over time in tuj1+ cells but decreased or plateaued in tuj1− cells leading to a significant difference in ascl1 expression within six days of ascl1 induction (fig 2e extended data fig 4c).this revealed a continuum of intermediate states through the 22-day repro- gramming period (fig 4a b).heat map visualization of genes identified by pca of all cells on the in cell lineage revealed two gene regulatory events during reprogramming with many cells at intermediate stages (fig 4c supplementary data 7).all rights reserved 4 | n a t u r e | v o l 0 0 0 | 0 0 m o n t h 2 0 1 6 letter research (fig 4d extended data fig 8 supplementary data 8 supplementary information).however our fractional analysis showed that the identity of intermediate repro- gramming cells could not be explained by a simple linear mixture of the differentiated fibroblast and neuron identities as revealed by an intermediary increase of lagrangian residuals (fig 4a).therefore we tested whether a neural precursor cell (npc) state is transiently induced by adding npc bulk transcriptome data along with that of mefs and neurons into the quadratic programming analysis (fig 4e).in addition several npc genes (that is gli3 sox9 nestin fabp7 hes1) are expressed in intermediates of the in cell reprogramming path20 (fig 4f).cells in rows were ordered based on unsupervised hierarchical clustering using pearson correlation as distance metric (figs 1e 2a) or based on their fractional identity as determined by quadratic programming (fig 4c see below) gene ontology enrichment analyses were performed using david bioinformatics resources 6.7 of the national institute of allergy and infectious diseases42.to express a single cell transcriptome as a linear combination of primary cell type transcriptomes we used published bulk rna-seq data sets for primary murine neurons24 myocytes25 and embryonic fibroblasts13 (extended data fig 6b c) neurons24 and embryonic fibroblasts13 (fig 4a) or neurons24 embryonic fibro- blasts13 and neuronal progenitor cells13 (fig 4e).the resulting fractional neuron identities of cells on the mef-to-in cell reprogram- ming path (265 cells in total excluding cells that were tau–egfp-negative at d5 or myocyte- and fibroblast-like cells at d22) were used to order cells in a pseudo- temporal manner (fig 4a–c e f).monocle analysis was performed using genes differentially expressed between neuron24 and embryonic fibroblast13 bulk rna-seq data (same gene set that was used when calculating fractional neuron and fibroblast identities in fig 4a genes listed in supplementary data 6).for the transcription factor network analysis (fig 4d) we computed a pairwise correlation matrix (pearson correlation visualized in correlogram in extended data fig 8a) for transcriptional regulators annotated as such in the animal © 2016 macmillan publishers limited.all rights reserved letter research extended data figure 4 | failed reprogramming at day 5 correlates with silencing of ascl1.a biplot showing the total number of transcripts per cell for all cells on the mef-to-in cell lineage as a function of the fraction neuron identity of each cell (see fig 4).b cells (depicted as circles) are arranged in the 2d independent component space based on the expression of genes used for quadratic programming in fig 4a.b heat map shows expression of trs that control the two stages of mef to in cell reprogramming (fig 4d) in cells ordered based on fractional neuron identity.f qrt–pcr of selected trs from initiation and maturation subnetworks from fig 4d.]
Patterns related to correlation between gene expressions during reprogramming from fibroblasts to neurons were analyzed, revealing a continuum of intermediate states.

Text 81
10.1038/nature18323
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 2 | transgenic ascl1 silencing explains early reprogramming failure. a, hierarchical clustering of day 5 cells using genes correlating positively and negatively with pc1 and pc2 from pca of day 5 ascl1-only cells. note that egfp fluorescence intensity and ascl1 mrna expression shown in the left side bar appear correlated. b, violin plots show the distribution of ascl1 and neuronal marker tubb3 in day 0 mefs, as well as tau–egfp+ and tau–egfp− day 5 cells. c, qrt–pcr for exogenous ascl1 expression (top, n=4, biological replicates) and western blot of ascl1 protein levels (bottom, supplementary data 5 ) for unsorted control mefs and day 2 cells (na, not applicable), as well as day 5, day 7, day 10 and day 12 cells fac-sorted using tau–egfp as a neuronal marker. both']. Reference sentences:[in addition we found that forced ascl1 expression resulted in less intracellular transcriptome variance a lower number of expressed genes (fig 1d) and a lower total number of transcripts per single cell (extended data fig 2a b).notably the distribution of average expres- sion levels per gene was similar for all experiments independent of ascl1 overexpression (extended data fig 2c).we found that tau–egfp− cells lacked expression of neuronal ascl1-target genes (genes b) and maintained expression of fibroblast-associated genes (genes a and c; fig 2a b extended data fig 4a supplementary data 4).in addition we found a positive correlation (r2 = 0.49) between ascl1 expres- sion and tau–egfp intensities (extended data fig 4b fig 2a b).quantitative real-time (qrt)–pcr and western blot analysis of ascl1 expression on day 5 to day 12 tau–egfp-sorted cells validated a significant decrease in ascl1 expression in tau–egfp− cells compared to tau–egfp+ cells (fig 2c supplementary data 5).to distinguish between these two mechanisms we used live cell microscopy to track cells over a time course from 3–6 days after ascl1 induction using an egfp–ascl1 fusion construct (fig 2d extended data fig 5).we found that transgenic ascl1 protein levels varied substantially over time and on average contin- ued to increase over time in tuj1+ cells but decreased or plateaued in tuj1− cells leading to a significant difference in ascl1 expression within six days of ascl1 induction (fig 2e extended data fig 4c).approximate number of transcripts was calculated from fpkm values by using the correlation between number of transcripts of exogenous spike-in mrna sequences and their respective measured mean fpkm values (extended data fig 2).all rights reserved letter research extended data figure 2 | total number of transcripts per cell decreases during mef-to-in cell reprogramming.a bonferroni-corrected p values for gene ontology enrichments are shown for each group of genes from fig 2a with representative genes listed (supplementary data 4).]
Patterns related to correlation between ascl1 expression and neuronal marker intensity in single cells are shown.

Text 82
10.1126/science.aaf6463
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 1. single-cell rna sequencing analysis of 5072 cells expressing markers of the oligodendrocyte lineage in 10 regions of the mouse cns. (a) targeted regions. cx, cortex; cc, corpus callosum; ca1, ca1 hippocampus; dg, dentate gyrus. (b) number of cells analyzed for each region. sn-vta, substantia nigra ventral tegmental area. (c) hierarchical clustering (left), correlation matrix (middle), and subclass abundances by region (right). ol, oligodendrocytes.']. Reference sentences:[we analyzed 5072 transcriptomes of single cells expressing markers from the oligodendrocyte lineage isolated from 10 distinct regions of the anterior-posterior and dorsal-ventral axis of the mouse juvenile and adult cns (fig 1 a and b).biclustering analysis (6) (fig s1b and s15) hierarchical clus- tering (fig 1c) and differential expression anal- ysis (tables s1 and s2) led to the identification of 13 distinct cell populations.we identified a second pdgfra+ population— vascular and leptomeningeal cells (vlmcs)— distinct from opcs and segregated from all oligodendrocyte lineage cells (fig 1c and 2a).we retrieved the 50 genes that better differ- entiate every branch of the dendrogram plot (fig 1c) and investigated their putative function by gene ontology analysis (fig s6 to s9 and tables s1 and s2).ca1 hypothalamus striatum vlmc opc cop nfol1 nfol2 mfol1 mfol2 mol1 mol4 mol2 mol3 mol5 mol6 fig 1.similarly cops and newly formed oligodendrocytes were present in all regions in juvenile mice (fig 1c and 4a) revealing a com- mon trajectory of differentiation between the various regions (fig 2a).different regions of the cns were populated by diverse mature oligodendrocytes (fig 1c and fig s12).because mol5 was already present in several regions of the juvenile cns (fig 1c and fig s12) final maturation of oligodendrocytes might already be achieved in the juvenile mice in certain regions such as the dorsal horn but only in adulthood in others such as the corpus callosum.]
Patterns of correlation between different cell populations expressing markers of the oligodendrocyte lineage across various regions of the CNS.

Text 83
10.1182/blood-2016-05-716480
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 4. pseudotime analysis reveals trends in surface marker and gene expression for differentiation trajectories. (a) diffusion map colored by pseudotime trajectories to e, gm, and l fates. each trajectory starts from an hsc (blue) and ends with a progenitor (red). (b) changes in surface marker expression and fsc-h through pseudotime for each of the 3 trajectories obtained from the normalized index data. for each trajectory, it is possible to see what cell types are passed through to reach the final cell fate. (c) normalized expression of genes positively (up) or negatively (down) correlated with the pseudotemporal ordering for each trajectory. mean normalized expression is plotted with standard deviation. (d) most significant relevant terms from gene set enrichment analysis for all the trajectories, performed in enrichr. terms with an adjusted p value ,.05 (using benjamini-hochberg correction for multiple testing) were considered significant. the full tables of results can be found in the supplemental data. mgi, mouse genome informatics.']. Reference sentences:[mapping differentiation trajectories from the single-cell expression landscape havingestablishedthatsinglecellsinthediffusionmaparearrangedina pattern consistent with known lineage relationships we next identified 3 differentiation trajectories (see “methods”) starting each time with e-slam hscs and ending with e gm and l progenitors (figure 4a).visualization of surface marker expression from the index data revealed dynamic profiles consistent with known expression patterns thus validating the pseudotemporal ordering (figure 4b).wenextidentifiedgenesshowingstatistically significantpositive or negative correlation with the pseudotemporal ordering (figure 4c).gene set enrichment analysis (figure 4d) showed enrichments consistent with the respective trajectories such as tetrapyrrole biosynthesis for e upregulated genes and neutrophil-mediated immunity for gm upregulated genes.up down n = 112 n = 145 n = 56 n = 24 n = 20 n = 587 up down up down 0.00 0.25 0.50 pseudotime 0.75 1.00 e 1.00 0.75 0.50 0.25 0.00 normalized expression normalized index data c b a d gene set enrichment analysis terms shown with adjusted p values (benjamini-hochberg method for correction for multiple hypotheses testing) 0mitotic cell cycle tetrapyrrole bio- synthetic process 8.0 x 10-7 atp binding 3.0 x 10-11 abnormal hematopoietic system 9.0 x 10-8 mitotic cell cycle 0 megakaryocyte erythrocyte progenitor 1.7 x 10-21 mast cells 0.0028 granulocyte monocyte progenitor 1.3 x 10-6 stem cells hsc 0.0032 thymocyte dp cd4+cd8+ 0.049 mast cells 3.5 x 10-6 mitotic cell cycle 4.2 x 10-8 cytokine sig- naling in imm- une system 0.012 no significant terms hemostasis 0.00081 hemostasis 2.4 x 10-6 abnormal immune system 1.8 x 10-7 abnormal immune system 7.2 x 10-7 abnormal immune system 0.021 abnormal homeostasis 0.0082 abnormal hematopoietic system 0.0028 leukocyte activation 0.0012 cytochrome-c oxidase activity 0.010 guanyl nucleotide binding 0.035 no significant terms no significant terms no significant terms mitotic cell cycle 1.01 x 10-9 neutrophil medi- ated immunity 0.012 coagulation 0.017 regulation of iymphocyte differentiation 0.063 hemostasis 0.0091 category e up e down gm up gm down l up l down biological processes molecular function mgi mammalian phenotype reactome (pathways) cell types (mouse gene atlas) gm l e dc2 dc2 dc2 dc3 dc3 dc3 dc1 dc1 dc1 gm l fsc-h cell type e gm l cd34 cd16 epcr fik2 cd150 cd48 sca1 pseudotime lt-hsc lmpp mpp1 mpp2 mpp3 pseudotime st-hsc mep cmp gmp unassigned fsc-h cell type cd34 cd16 epcr fik2 cd150 cd48 sca1 fsc-h cell type high low cd34 cd16 epcr fik2 cd150 cd48 sca1 figure 4.as expected from the gene set enrichment analysis (figure 4d) there is no substantial increase of either hydrogen ion transmembrane transport or cell cycle genes along the l trajectory.we next used the spike-in based normalization to investigate whether genes identified as downregulated in figure 4 were indeed downregulated in real terms (eg fewer mrna molecules per single cell).however the majority of downregulated genes from figure 4 were downregulated in absolute termsalong the eand gmtrajectories (109 of 112 for e and 55 of 56 for gm) thus highlighting a subset of genes actively expressed in hscs despite their quiescent and metabolically less-active state (supplemental table 1).]
Patterns related to correlation in gene expression along differentiation trajectories, validated by surface marker expression and gene set enrichment analysis.

Text 84
10.1182/blood-2016-05-716480
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 5. analysis of cell cycle activation during hspc differentiation at single-cell resolution. (a) diffusion map of all cells colored by computationally assigned cell cycle category. there is no assignment for g0 separately because of limitations of the method. (b) proportion of e-slams, lmpps, gmps, and meps in each of the cell cycle categories. the cell types displayed are based on the narrow gating strategy. (c) gene set enrichment analysis was performed for the 3 trajectories after the removal of cell cycle genes. the most relevant significant terms for genes positively correlated with pseudotime analysis are shown. terms with an adjusted p value ,.05 (using benjaminihochberg correction for multiple testing) were considered significant. the full tables of results can be found in the supplemental data. (d) average expression of hydrogen ion transmembrane transport genes and cell cycle genes across pseudotime. each gene was normalized across the median of all 3 trajectories for plotting. the average expression is colored by trajectory, and means are shown with standard deviations. trna, transfer rna.']. Reference sentences:[to account for batch effect differences in ercc concentration between lanes (supplemental figure 5) we applied combat from the sva package using the sorting gate (hspc/prog/lt- hsc) as an adjustment variable.single-cell resolution analysis of cell cycle activation during hspc differentiation having identified cell cycle as the most highly enriched term for the genes upregulated along both the e and gm trajectories we next took advantage of a recently reported predictor for allocating individual cells to g0/g1 s and g2/m cell cycle categories based on their single-cell transcriptomes.35thedistribution of singlecells acrossthese 3cellcycle categorieswasingoodagreementwiththeenrichmentofcellcycleterms in the genes upregulated along the e and gm trajectories (figure 5a-b).of note the cell cycle–filtered genes upregulated in both the e and gm trajectories showed strong enrichment for terms associated with mitochondrial adenosine triphosphate production consistentwithpreviousreportsthathscsprimarilyuseglycolysis44-46 but switch to mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation to meet the rapidly increasing energy demands for differentiation.47 we next investigated how hydrogen ion transmembrane transport gene and cell cycle gene expression changes through pseudotime (figure 5d).]
Patterns related to cell cycle activation during differentiation, including gene expression changes and trajectory analysis.

Text 85
10.1016/j.celrep.2016.06.059
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 4. characterization of vascular cells, astrocytes, and oligodendrocytes (a) hierarchical clustering of the highest pairwise gene correlations within vascular cells reveals two large clusters of subtype-specific transcripts. (b) rpca of 43 striatal vascular cells identifies two molecularly distinct populations, assigned to vsmcs that express myl9 and tagln and endothelial cells that express ly6e and pltp. (c) histogram of vascular cells’ pc1 scores shows a clearly bimodal distribution and confirms the existence of two distinct subtypes. (d) hierarchical clustering of the highest pairwise gene correlations within immune cells reveals two large clusters of interconnected transcripts. (e) rpca of 119 immune cells (microglia and macrophages) identifies two molecularly distinct populations, assigned to microglia that express sparc and macrophages that express mrc1. (f) distribution of single immune cells along the first pc1 of rpca. cells form two distinct peaks. (g) hierarchical clustering of the highest pairwise gene correlations within oligodendrocytes reveals two large clusters of interconnected transcripts. (h) rpca of 43 striatal oligodendrocytes identifies two distinct oligodendrocyte populations: mos, which express klk6 and sec11c, and nfos, which express nfasc and ckb. there are also a significant number of oligodendrocytes with intermediate expression of both sets of genes, which are likely transitioning between nfos and mos. (i) distribution of single oligodendrocytes along the first pc1 of rpca. mo and nfo cells form two distinct peaks, with transitioning oligodendrocytes bridging the two peaks. (j) hierarchical clustering of the highest pairwise gene correlations within astrocytes did not reveal interconnected transcripts, instead showing low correlation values between genes. (k) rpca of 107 single striatal astrocytes reveals transcripts that increase or decrease continuously without defining distinct subpopulations. cells (rows) are ordered by their pc1 scores, and genes (columns) are ordered by their pc1 loading. the continuum of astrocyte transcriptional states is marked on one side by higher expression of transcripts related to synaptic communication (slc6a11, slc6a1, slc6a9, gria1, and gria2) and on the other side by higher expression of transcripts related to translation (rpl9, rpl14, rps5, and rpsa) and cell polarity regulators (cdc42). (l) the distribution of single astrocytes along pc1 is unimodal, indicating striatal astrocytes exhibit continuous transcriptional variation within one discrete subtype.']. Reference sentences:[within vascular cells pairwise correlation analysis revealed two large anti- correlated gene groups (figure 4a).like- wise within immune cells pairwise correlation analysis and rpca revealed two discrete subpopulations: microglia cells −1.0 −0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 laile endoth smc v spearman correlation pltp ly6c1 sepp1 gpr116 slc22a8 tspan13 bsg flt1 higd1b ltbp1 rgs4 mylk myh11 myl9 tagln acta2 anln klk6 sepp1 s100b sept8 anxa5 fgf1 ndrg1 nfasc parvb tspan6 opalin ttyh1 ctps gpr17 cntn1 agt gjb6 slc6a11 slc6a9 gria2 igsf1 gria1 fgfr3 slc6a1 rpl9 ezr rpl14 cdc42 sub1 rps5 rpsa eef1a1 a b c g vascular cells oligodendrocytes astrocytes h i j k l pc1 density of cells pc1 density of cells pc1 density of cells aldoc sparc mog sparc olfml3 cx3cr1 tmem119 selplg cd9 tgfbr1 f11r mlxipl myo5a apoe lyz2 cbr2 ms4a7 pf4 f13a1 dab2 mrc1 c1qb f pc1 density of cells macrophages ailg ciro m d e 0 2.4 4.9 immune cells endothelial vsmc nfo mo log10 cpm spearman correlation macrophage microglia figure 4.within oligodendrocytes we found two large anticorrelated gene groups (figure 4g).the pairwise correlation analysis did not identify two clearly anticorrelated gene groups for astrocytes (figure 4j); instead whole-transcriptome rpca revealed a continuous transcriptional gradient defined by a unimodal population distribution (figures 4k and 4l).]
Patterns of gene correlations reveal distinct subpopulations within vascular cells, immune cells, and oligodendrocytes, while astrocytes exhibit continuous transcriptional variation.

Text 86
10.1016/j.celrep.2016.06.059
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 2. characterization of discrete msn subtypes (a) hierarchical clustering of the highest pairwise gene correlations in msns shows two strongly anticorrelated clusters of genes that include known msn subtype markers for d1- and d2 msns. (b) rpca of msns. cells (rows) are ordered by their projection onto pc1, and genes (columns) are ordered by their positive (left) or negative (right) contribution to pc1. this identifies three molecularly distinct populations, assigned as d1 msn (red), d2 msn (green), and d1/2 hybrid msn (yellow). the bar on the left shows the experimental origin of cells. (c) distribution of single msns projected onto d1-d2 scores. the d1-d2 score is calculated by summing the scaled expression values of the genes shown in (b). d1- and d2 msns form distinct peaks, and the novel msns are distributed between the two peaks. (d) biplot of d1- and d2 msn cells by their expression of d1 genes (y axis) and of d2 genes (x axis). scaled expression of drd1a is shown by the color of the cell points. (e) sagittal brain section of a d2-gfp/d1-tdtom double-reporter mouse showing tdtom-gfp double-positive novel msns in both nucleus accumbens and dorsal striatum. (f) confocal imaging of striatal slices of d2-gfp/d1-tdtom double-reporter mice demonstrating the existence of d1/2 hybrid msns in the striatum. (g) rpca of msns in the d1 part of (d) using all expressed genes. cells (rows) are ordered by their projection onto pc1, and genes (columns) are ordered by their positive (left) or negative (right) contribution to pc1. this identifies two molecularly distinct populations assigned as major (foxp1) d1 msn (red) and pcdh8-msn (yellow). (h) biplot of foxp1-d1 and pcdh8-msn cells by their expression of d1 genes (y axis) and pcdh8 genes (x axis). scaled expression of penk is shown by the color of the cell points. (i) distribution of msns projected onto pcdh8-foxp1 scores. major-d1 and pcdh8-msns form distinct peaks. (j) boxplots showing specific pcdh8 and tacr1 expression in pcdh8-msns compared to other cell types in msn. (k) rpca of msns in the d2 part of (d). cells (rows) are ordered by their projection onto pc1, and genes (columns) are ordered by their positive (left) or negative (right) contribution to pc1. this identifies two molecularly distinct populations assigned as d2 msn (green) and htr7-msn (light green). (l) biplot of d2- and htr7-msn cells by their expression of htr7 genes (y axis) and synpr genes (x axis). scaled expression of tac1 is shown by the color of the cell points. (m) distribution of msns projected onto htr7-synpr scores. major d2- and htr7-msns form distinct peaks. (n) boxplots showing specific htr7 and agtr1a expression in htr7-msns compared to other cell types in msn.']. Reference sentences:[this revealed two sets of genes that are specific to d1- or d2 msns (figure 2a).the d2-specific gene cluster included the known d2 msn markers drd2 adora2a penk gpr6 and gpr52 (heiman et al. 2008; lobo et al. 2006) as well as the transcription factor (tf) sp9 (figure 2a).we scored msns based on their expression of the d1 and d2 marker genes (d1-d2 scores) (sup- plemental experimental procedures) and observed a clearly bimodal distribution of cells based on these scores (figures 2b and 2c) indicating the existence of two discrete subtypes: d1- and d2 msns (figure 2d).the pcdh8- msn subpopulation coexpressed the d2 neuropeptide pcdh8 along with tac1 (figure 2h).we scored d1 msns based on expression of rpca-identified genes (pcdh8-foxp1 scores) which revealed a clearly bimodal population distribution defining two discrete subpopulations (figure 2i).the rpca using these a c e f d b g k l n m h j i figure 2.]
Identification of distinct cell subtypes based on gene correlations, including d1 and d2 MSNs, and novel hybrid MSNs.

Text 87
10.1016/j.celrep.2016.06.059
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 5. cell type-specific tfs identified by single-cell transcriptome analysis (a) correlogram visualizing correlation of single-cell gene expression between cell type-specific tfs. (b) scaled expression of the tfs most specific to discrete cell types. scaled expression of marker genes is shown by the color of the cell points.']. Reference sentences:[distinct groups of tfs maintain cell type identity we used correlation analysis to identify tfs expressed specif- ically (spearman correlation coefficient > 0.5) in single cells of a given type and visualized the pairwise correlation of the result- ing 69 tfs in a correlogram (figure 5a; table s7).among them are sox9 for astrocytes (caiazzo et al. 2015) sox10 for ol- igodendrocytes (yang et al. 2013) gata2 for endothelial cells (elcheva et al. 2014) and maf for macrophages (hegde et al. lhx2 nr2e1 prrx1 npas3 rorb dbx2 id3 sox9 id2 mlxipl maf fli1 klf2 lyl1 runx1 mafb ikzf1 ets1 sp100 id1 foxf2 sox17 sox18 gata2 lef1 tbx18 heyl nr2f2 tbx3 tbx2 foxs1 e2f7 e2f8 foxm1 dlx2 sp8 dlx1 nkx2−9 sox10 gm98 st18 foxj1 myb otx2 msx1 lmx1a esrrb meis2 myt1l bcl11b rarb rxrg foxp2 isl1 camta1 dpf1 bcl11a peg3 hivep2 trerf1 foxp1 klf16 zfhx2 npas2 zfp941 sp9 pou3f1 ebf1 gatad1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  sox9-astrocyte                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         mlxipl-microglia                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        maf-macrophage                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        gata2-endo                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        tbx2-pericyte                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         e2f8-stem                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         st18-oligo                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         foxj1-ependy c                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         lmx1a-ependy s                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      myt1l-neurons a b neurons astrocytes oligo endo ependy clia pericyte stem immune cells sec −1.0 −0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 0 0.5 1 normalized transcript level vascular cells figure 5.thus we also provide candidate tfs for stem cell trans- formation into cell types for which there are no existing protocols (lmx1a for secretory ependymal cells foxj1 for ciliated ependy- mal cells tbx2 for vsmcs e2f8 for nscs mlxipl for microglia isl1 for d1 msns and sp9 for d2 msns (figure 5a; table s7).]
Summary: Correlation patterns of cell type-specific transcription factors (TFs) in single-cell gene expression, identifying TFs specific to different cell types.

Text 88
10.1016/j.celrep.2016.06.059
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 1. reverse engineering of mouse striatum by scrna-seq (a) workﬂow for obtaining and sequencing cdna from single cells. striatal slices from d1-tdtom/ d2-gfp and aldh1l1-gfp mice were dissociated and cells collected by facs or macs. cells were then captured, imaged, and cdna amplified in microﬂuidic chips. (b) unbiased clustering of ten major classes of cells using tsne, which distributes cells according to their whole-transcriptome correlation distance. each cell is represented as a dot and colored by a clustering algorithm (dbscan). (c) box-and-whisker plots showing total number of genes detected per cell for major cell types. (d) expression of putative marker genes for each of ten major cell types. scaled expression of marker genes is shown by the color of the cell points. each tsne cluster is enriched for one marker, and we were able to assign cells to one of ten major cell types. (e) heatmap of the top 50 genes most highly correlated to each cell type. each row is a single cell, and each column is a single gene. the bar on the right shows the experimental origin of cells. the bar on the left shows dbscan clustering of cells, and the bottom bar shows the cell type assignment for each set of 50 genes. within each 50-gene set, the genes are ordered by increasing the p value of the correlation to that cell type from left to right.']. Reference sentences:[we sampled cells either captured randomly or enriched spe- cifically for msns or astrocytes using facs from d1-tdtomato (tdtom)/d2-gfp or aldh1l1-gfp mice respectively (figure 1a) (heintz 2004; shuen et al. 2008).a c d e b figure 1.to identify distinct cell populations in mic-scrna-seq cells we visualized cells using 2d t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding (tsne) on whole-transcrip- tome data weighted by a bayesian noise model (figure 1b) (kharchenko et al. 2014; van der maaten and hinton 2008).unbiased identification of cell type-specific genes we identified marker genes for these cell types by the spearman correlation of genes to cell cluster (figure 1e; table s2).]
Summary: Correlation patterns between cell types and marker genes were identified using single-cell transcriptomics data.

Text 89
10.1210/en.2016-1235
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 2. correlation of gene expression in ␤-cells from old and young mice. a, scatterplot depicting correlation of expressed genes in ␤-cells from old and young mice. red triangles indicate differentially regulated genes (fc ն 2, fdr ͻ 0.01, nc ͼ 5). b, heat map of the 193 differentially expressed genes between old and young ␤-cells. the fc bar depicts fold changes. red bars in right panel indicate whether a gene belongs to one or more of the enriched function gene sets identified by the ipa pathway analysis. p1, gene expression; p2, cell cycle; p3, cell death and survival; p4, cellular function and maintenance; and p5, cellular movement. c, the most significant gene set in each functional category that corresponds to p1–p5 in panel b. d, scatterplot showing the correlation of 151 enriched ␤-cell genes between old and young ␤-cells. three genes were significantly down-regulated in old ␤-cells and are indicated by red triangles and gene symbols.']. Reference sentences:[the difference constitutes low and intermediate abundance genes (supplemental figure 2).ipa analysis revealed that the differen- tially expressed genes were enriched in pathways regulating gene expres- sion cell cycle and cell death as well as cellular function maintenance and movement (figure 2 b and c and supplemental tables 1 and 2).figure 2d shows a strong correlation of expres- sion of these =-cell-enriched genes between young and old mice.in fact only the expression of mapk10 (fc = =4.2 fdr = 8.4e-03) car15 (fc = =6.5 fdr = 3.6e-03) and edem1 (fc = =3.5 fdr = 5.9e-03) were significantly different between old and young =-cells (figure 2d).we found 103 of 244 glucose ho- meostasis genes to be expressed in a d b c figure 2.]
Summary: Correlation of gene expression patterns in β-cells from old and young mice, with enrichment in gene expression, cell cycle, cell death, cellular function, and movement pathways.

Text 90
10.1210/en.2016-1235
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 1. metabolic characteristics and ␤-cell mass in old and young mice. the following parameters were measured in young and old mice: body weight (a), lean body mass (b), body fat mass (c), plasma leptin (d), blood glucose (e), plasma insulin (f), plasma glucagon (g), pancreas weight (h), ␤-cell mass (j), islet cell number (k), and islet size( l). i, immunofluorescence images of pancreas sections stained for insulin (in brown). m, histogram depicting correlation between body weight and ␤-cell mass.']. Reference sentences:[consistent with the increase in fat mass circulating leptin levels were elevated (figure 1d).the old mice had reduced nonfasting blood glucose but unchanged plasma insulin and glucagon levels relative to the young mice (figure 1e- g).unchanged (supplemental figure 1).despite the change in body composition in old mice we did not see a significant increase in the plasma insulin to blood glucose ratio (sup- plemental figure 1).transcription factors 721as described earlier we identified mouse transcription factors based on gene ontology and manual a b c d e f g h j i k l m figure 1.]
Summary: Correlation between body weight and β-cell mass in old and young mice, with changes in fat mass and circulating leptin levels.

Text 91
10.1073/pnas.1610155113
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 6. coregulation and coexpression of synaptic molecules. (a) heat plot of correlations between genes representing cell adhesion-, exocytosis-, rhogap-, and rhogef-related molecules in hippocampal tissue. coefficients were computed based on gene expression values in five developmental stages in tissue samples. unsupervised clustering revealed 12 clusters (labeled on the right and top) based on 395,641 gene correlations. (b) same analysis as in a, but for single-cell data. coefficients were computed based on single-cell gene expression values independent of cell type identity. unsupervised clustering revealed five clusters (labeled on the right and top) based on the 187,489 gene correlations. (c) combined data of correlation coefficients from tissue and single-cell samples. gene pairs with both coefficients larger than the 92nd percentile of the respective distributions were further analyzed (green shaded area; see text for further information). (d) graph representation of correlation coefficients displayed in the green shaded area of c. each vertex connects two genes according to the correlation coefficient between the two. graph representation of correlations in c revealed two independent, uncorrelated subgraphs. (e, left) subgraph 1 and subgraph 2 remained independent when relaxing gene inclusion criteria (i.e., when green area in c was gradually increased). (right) density of vertex distribution (number of gene–gene correlations) followed power law distribution, indicating that both subgraphs were scale-free and nonrandom in nature. (f, left) mean normalized gene expression values in the two subgraphs showed diametrically opposite developmental trajectories, and suggest that genes in subgraph were developmentally coregulated. because single-cell expression was a selection criterion in c, these genes were also coexpressed at the single-cell level. (right) as suggested by the developmental differences, genes in subgraph 1 and subgraph 2 had different expression values in single cells of all three cell types, collected at ∼p21. (g) core early- and late-gene networks (subgraph 1 and subgraph 2, respectively) were identified by common motifs found in cell type-specific analyses (i.e., these correlations were present in pooled data from the three cell types, in pooled data from rs-int and fs-int cells, representing interneurons, and rs-int, fs-int, and ca1-pyr data, analyzed independently). averaged data represent mean ± sem.']. Reference sentences:[first we independently examined gene correlations in tissue and single-cell data and used unsupervised clustering to consoli- date these results (fig 6 a and b) which reflected developmental and cell type-specific characteristics respectively (fig s6a).we reasoned that functionally relevant correlations may be present in both sets with high correlation coefficients and therefore selected gene pair correlations that were in the tail of distributions (>92nd percentile; note that this threshold was chosen arbitrarily but that consequences of this analysis were thoroughly tested at multiple threshold values; fig 6e) both for tissue and single-cell data (fig 6c).the structure of the resulting graph was surprising because two independent subgraphs emerged that exhibited dense cor- relations within but no correlations between them (fig 6d; note the complete lack of interconnecting vertices; see fig s6c for complete gene listings in this graph).these analyses consistently revealed more intranetwork than internetwork correlations which re- versed when lowering inclusion threshold to 20 percentiles (0.2 correlation coefficient threshold in fig 6e left) suggesting robust independence (note that with “all inclusion” 0 percentile the graph is perfectly connected).however both subgraphs displayed a nonrandom “scale-free” nature where some genes were more interconnected than others following a power law distribution and thus suggesting a biological origin (fig 6e right) (43).specifically subgraph 1 included genes that were highly expressed during early devel- opment whereas subgraph 2 contained genes that exhibited later expression onsets with peak expressions occurring >2 wk after birth (fig 6f left).in agreement with this finding late expressing genes (subgraph 2) displayed higher expression than early express- ing genes (subgraph 1) in single cells of all three types (fig 6f right) which were collected at ∼p21.therefore we repeated analyses such that fig 6b only included rs-int or fs-int or ca1-pyr cells separately or rs-int b a synaptic cleft presynaptic terminal synaptic vesicle ca2+ snare complex synaptotagmin (syt) synaptobrevin (vamp) snap25 munc18 complexin (cplx) rab munc13 (unc13) rim rimbp active zone d c syntaxin (stx) 0 2 4 0 2 4 0 2 4 0 2 4 snap syntaxin synaptobrevin munc18 complexin synaptotagmin cask rab rim rimbp synuclein syntrophin munc13 ca1-pyr rs-int fs-int p21 tissue snap47 snap25 syt11 syt1 cplx1 snca sncg unc13a cask rab3a rab3c munc18-1 stx12 syt4 snare complex active zone proteins synaptotagmins normalized gene count (per thousand) 0.5 1.5 2.5 ca1-pyr rs-int fs-int p21 tissue normalized gene count (per thousand) chn1 arhgap25 arhgap5 arhgap3 32 4 0 1 mtap1b ywhae rasgrf1 rasgrp1 elmo1 apc ca1-pyr rs-int fs-int p21 tissue normalized gene count (per thousand) rims1 rims3 rims2 vamp2 syt6 vamp1 abr 0.5 1.5 2.5 32 4 0 1 0.5 1.5 2.5 32 4 0 1 0.5 1.5 2.5 32 4 0 1 arhgap21 rhogap rhogef synaptic exocytosis fig 5.we found that each of these analyses confirmed the independence of subgraphs 1 and 2 (fig s6b) and that the gene representation in each cell type-specific dataset was at least 80% identical to that in fig 6d (fig s6b) suggesting that coexpression of these genes occurs at the single- cell level.moreover we identified core parts of these subgraphs (i.e. parts that can be consistently detected in each cell type) by taking the intersection of the cell type-specific analyses (fig 6g).this hy- pothesis was supported by the existence of correlations between structurally relevant rhogef and rhogap molecules in early development when synapses are formed (fig 6g left and fig s6d upper).conversely emerging correlations between cell adhesion and exocytosis in the late-gene network may reflect synapse specialization (fig 6g right and fig s6d lower).(threshold) links (thousand) ‘scale-free’ properties 0 10 20 0 10 20 30 40 k p (k) within within between & 1 2 1 2 1 2 1 2 1 2 1 2 cask epha5 pcdh19 snap29 igsf8 clstn3 vamp1 ephb2 unc5d cbln2 fstl5 pik3r1 k 5 mtap1b snap25 mtap1a syt11 nrxn3 cplx1 p1 cd200 ptpn2 pcdh19 opcml nrxn1 ncam1 lrrn3 epha5 ctnnb1 chl1 erc1 cask ywhae mtap1b daam1 arhgef7 apc odz3 ptprn ppfia3 omg lrrn2 igsf8 epha6 cntnap1 clstn3 clstn1 bai2 app syt7 syt11 syt1 stxbp1 sncb snap47 rab3a cplx2 arhgap44 mtap1a dock10 arhgef9 clstn1 1 2 colors: exocytosisrhogap rhogef cams fig 6.finally the subiculum neuron data allowed us to test the validity of synaptic gene correlation networks described in fig 6.to reexamine the identity of the two networks we singled out overlapping gene correlations in all five cell types (fig 7i) and found that they were nearly identical to subgraph 1 and subgraph 2 identified based on the three ca1 cell types (fig 6g).(i) analyses of gene expression in bs-pyr and rs-pyr cells confirmed existence of early- and late-gene networks (shown in fig 6).]
Patterns of coregulation and coexpression of synaptic molecules were identified in single-cell data, revealing two independent subgraphs with diametrically opposite developmental trajectories. These subgraphs were scale-free and nonrandom, suggesting biological relevance.

Text 92
10.1073/pnas.1610155113
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 3. combined electrophysiological and transcriptional analysis. (a) ion channels define neuronal excitability that can be quantified using active (ap-related) and passive electrophysiological properties (e.g., voltage response for hyperpolarizing and depolarizing current injections). these parameters differ between rs-int, fs-int, and ca1-pyr cells, and the lower panel shows differences in ap firing in the three cell types. (b) number of detected ion channels was similar in rs-int and fs-int cells, but lower in ca1-pyr cells. (c) consistency of ion channel expression was similar in all three cell types. (d) averaged, single-cell ion channel expression in rs-int (n = 14), fs-int (n = 9), and ca1-pyr (n = 14) cells, and in aged-matched p21 tissue control (for numerical values, see dataset s1). (e) correlation analysis of electrophysiological parameters and ion channel expression in rs-int, fs-int, and ca1-pyr cells. (upper) normalized gene expression data and (left) electrophysiology parameter measurements for rs-int, fs-int, and ca1-pyr cells. averaged data represent mean ± sem. asterisks represent significant differences between cell types (difference between two cell types; difference between two–two cell types; difference between all three cell types).']. Reference sentences:[to link sin- gle-cell transcriptional profiles to functional properties we exam- ined expression of 140 voltage-gated ion channels (see materials and methods for gene set assembly; fig 3a fig s3a and dataset s1).because rs- fs- and ca1-pyr cells have distinct electro- physiological properties (fig 3a) we asked whether ion channel expression could account for their physiological differences.on average we detected more ion channels and more consistent gene expression in interneurons than in pyr cells (fig 3 b and c) following total transcript levels.as a pivotal example of cell type- specific gene expression we found enrichment of na+ and k+ channels in fs cells (fig 3 d and e upper).next we quantified electrophysiological parameters (n = 11; fig 3 a and e left) because their correlation with gene ex- pression patterns could reflect characteristic cell type-specific properties in these cells.we used unsupervised clustering and plotted genes/electrophysiology parameters with at least one correlation value of greater than 0.35 or less than −0.35 (arbi- trary threshold to eliminate no or minimal correlations; fig 3e).here we found that ap firing rate threshold symmetry and afterhyperpolarization parameters that typically exhibit high values in fs cells correlated with high expression of na+ and k+ channels (fig 3e) including kcnc1 (kv3.1) and kcnc2 (kv3.2).in addition we found significantly higher expression of kcnc3 scn1a and trpc6 (fig 3e) in fs cells (described for pv d b a rs-int fs-int ca1-pyr rs-int fs-int ca1-pyr 0 2 4 6 8 10 detected genes (thousand) c detected genes (%) cell collection rnaseq brain electrophysiology rs-i.(log10 based) fig 3.]
Summary: Correlation between ion channel expression and electrophysiological properties in different cell types, with specific gene enrichment in interneurons.

Text 93
10.1016/j.devcel.2016.07.025
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 6. previously unappreciated paralogous, synexpressed genes are critical for development (a) correlations of expression patterns for sets of two to five genes that are similar to each other in sequence. a total of 295 sets of genes had a correlation coefficient greater than 0.25 (pink box), and were considered paralogous and synexpressed.']. Reference sentences:[we found 295 sets of two to five genes that were synex- pressed and paralogous (supplemental experimental proce- dures; figure 6a and table s3).we selected nine pairs of synexpressed paralogous genes out of the 295 sets identified in figure 6c and prepared figure 6.high levels of embryonic lethality were observed in both condi- tions (82.7% for t24e12.1 and 70.3% for t24e12.13; figure 6d) suggesting that both of these genes are critical for develop- ment.transcripts of these two genes are enriched in ab de- scendants at the 8- and 16-cell stages (figure 6e).to test this we compared our data with that from a genome-wide rnai screen(kamathetal.2003)andfoundthat6.7%ofthetotalgenes tested in the screen had an embryonic phenotype (figure 6f).identifying critical regulators of development testing a small subset of genes we identified two that are critical for embryonic development (figure 6d).these two genes are similar in sequence and have similar but slightly staggered transcript enrichment pat- terns (figure 6e).we considered sets of genes to be synexpressed if their average correlation coefficient exceeded 0.25 (figure 6a).rrf-3 mutant worms (pk1429) were used for experiments in figure s4 and n2 worms were used for experiments in figure 6d.]
Patterns of correlation in gene expression among sets of paralogous genes critical for development.

Text 94
10.1016/j.cell.2016.07.043
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure s4. the single-cell landscape of small intestinal ilcs, related to figure 3 (a) facs plots showing gating strategy for indexed single-cell sorting of ilcs. (b) quantification of cell types obtained by the gating strategy in (a). (c) heatmap showing marker genes for all non-ilcs shown in (b). (d) umi count of the indicated genes across all single cells. (e) pairwise correlation between the transcriptomes of 1129 single cells. the color-coding indicates post-clustering inference of subset membership (blue = ilc1; green = ilc2; red = ilc3; brown = ilcx). (f) maximum likelihood-based assignment of each single-cell transcriptome of the 15 ilc clusters to bulk transcriptional clusters of ilc1, ilc2, nkp46+ ilc3, and lti-like ilc3.']. Reference sentences:[]
Summary: Correlation patterns between transcriptomes of different single cells, indicating subset membership and bulk transcriptional clusters.

Text 95
10.1038/nature19328
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 3 | molecular pathways differentially activated in her2− versus her2+ cultured ctcs. a, comparison of quantitative ms proteomes (6,349 proteins) showing distinct profiles for individual cultured ctcs (brx-82, brx-142), but linear correlation between proteins differentially expressed in her2+ and her2− subpopulations; ni, normalized intensity; n=2 biological replicates per ctc line brx-42, brx-82, brx-142 (supplementary table 3). b, c, cytoscape network maps (top) and gsea pathway analysis (bottom) depicting proteins enriched by greater than log2(0.5) by quantitative ms in (b) her2+ and (c) her2− ctcs (gsea fdr ≤ 0.25; nominal p cut-off <0.05; supplementary table 4). coloured shapes represent proteins within denoted pathways. red asterisks highlight rtk pathways in b, and notch pathways in c.']. Reference sentences:[after 4 weeks in culture facs-purified green fluorescent protein (gfp)-tagged her2− ctcs acquired her2+ cells (brx-82: 42%; brx-142: 46%) while her2+ ctcs generated her2− cells at lower efficiency (brx-82: 5%; brx-142: 11%) (fig 2a b and extended data fig 3a).this interconversion was also evident by mixing equal proportions of gfp+/her2+ and gfp−/ her2− ctcs with the emergence of gfp+/her2− and gfp−/her2+ cells respectively (extended data fig 3a).single her2− ctcs initially proliferated slowly (extended data fig 3b) and first acquired her2+ daughter cells at the 5- to 9-cell stage (6.5%) with rapid interconversion thereafter (10–19 cells: 47% > 20 cells: 59%; fig 2c d).tumours established from her2− ctcs displayed her2+ subpopulations and vice versa (fig 2e and extended data fig 3c).within mixed tumours gfp-tagged her2− ctcs produced gfp+/her2+ cells (44%) and in separate tumours gfp-tagged her2+ ctcs generated gfp+/her2− cells (21%) (fig 2f and extended data fig 3d).while proteome profiles of indi- vidual cell lines were distinct they shared differences between her2+ and her2− subpopulations (pearson correlation coefficients: brx-82 versus brx-142 = 0.81; brx-82 versus brx-42 = 0.71; brx-42 versus brx-142 = 0.64) (fig 3a and extended data fig 4a b).her2+ ctcs showed enrichment (pathway interaction database (pid)) of receptor tyrosine kinase (rtk) and pro-growth signalling (gsea false discov- ery rate (fdr) ≤ 0.25) (fig 3b and supplementary tables 3 and 4).scrna-seq analysis of 15 pri- mary her2+ ctcs compared with 7 her2− ctcs from matched patient blood samples showed enrichment for 15 of 32 shared path- ways (erbb1 erbb2/erbb3 igf1 epha2 met) identified by ms analysis of cultured ctc lines (fig 3b extended data fig 4d e and supplementary tables 4 and 5).in contrast to her2+ ctcs ms analysis of cultured her2− ctcs showed increased expression of proteins enriched in notch (hes/hey presenilin 1 (ps1)) and dna damage pathways (aurorab atm atr fanconi) (gsea fdr ≤ 0.25) (fig 3c and supplementary tables 3 and 4).despite proteomic enrichment for aurora b signalling her2− ctcs were not differ- entially sensitive to aurora family inhibitors (fig 3c extended data fig 5a and supplementary tables 3 and 4).letter research extended data figure 3 | dynamics of her2+ and her2− interconversion.]
Correlation between protein expression profiles in her2+ and her2− single cells, with distinct pathway enrichments in each subpopulation.

Text 96
10.1016/j.cell.2016.07.054
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure s1. library complexity metrics, correlation between replicates, pca, and tsne, related to figure 1 (a) violin plots of genes/cell (upper) and transcripts/cell (lower) across the six experimental replicates. only 27,994 cells filtered based on qc criteria are included (individual points).']. Reference sentences:[]
Summary: Correlation patterns between gene expressions in cells across replicates are shown in violin plots.

Text 97
10.1016/j.cell.2016.07.054
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 7. comparison of drop-seq with smart-seq2 (a) bulk rna-seq expression levels of 15,063 genes tightly correlate across two biological replicates ($10,000 cells each) processed using the smart-seq2 method. (b) gene expression levels averaged across 229 single cells (three biological replicates) tightly correlate with the expression levels in the bulk libraries. (c) single-cell averaged expression levels of vsx2-gfp cells (log(transcripts-per-million + 1) units) correlate between smart-seq2 and drop-seq datasets (d) sensitivity of transcript detection in single-cell libraries as a function of smart-seq2 bulk expression levels. curves show results for smart-seq2 (three replicates), drop-seq (six replicates), and deep-sequenced drop-seq and downsampled smart-seq2 data. (e) clustering and tsne visualization of smart-seq2 single-cell data. each cell is labeled on the tsne map by its random forest (rf) assigned cell type. the rf model assigned one of 18 possible types including 14 bc types (1a-8/9), rbc, mu¨ ller glia (mg), amacrine cells (a), rod photoreceptors (r), cone photoreceptors (c), or unknown (n).']. Reference sentences:[as expected the higher sequencing depth per cell in smart-seq2 enabled better detection of lowly expressed genes compared to drop-seq (figure 7d).deeper sequencing greatly improved the transcript detection efficiency in drop-seq libraries and was comparable to smart-seq2 li- braries downsampled to a similar depth (figure 7d).clustering the 229 sin- gle cells using an approach similar to that used for the drop-seq data generated only eight clusters many of which expressed signatures of multiple bc types (figure 7e; star methods).we classified individual cells within these clusters using a random forest (rf) model (figure 7e labels) trained on drop- seq bipolar signatures (figure s3d; star methods).sixty percent of these markers featured among the top 30 de genes found in the drop-seq analysis (figure 7f) suggesting consistency between the results obtained from the drop-seq and smart-seq2 libraries.cell 166 1308–1323 august 25 2016 1319 bulk log(tpm+1) rep 1 log(<tpm>+1) bulk (3 reps) ss2 log(<tpm>+1) 229 single cells drop-seq log(<tpm>+1) 27499 single cells ss2 log(<tpm>+1) 229 single cells bulk log(tpm+1) rep 2 r = 0.93 r = 0.72 a b c d 10 10 100 50 50 0 0 –50 60 60 20 20 40 40 0 0 –60 –60 –80 –40 –40 –20 –20 –50 r = 0.97 8 6 4 2 8 6 4 2 10 8 6 6 4 2 10 8 4 2 10 8 6 4 2 10 8 6 4 2 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 0.0 2.5 5.0 7.5 10.0 log(tpm+1) bulk ss2 detection probability drop-seq (n = 6): 8200 reads/cell ss2 (n = 3): 835000 reads/cell ss2 downsamp: 400000 reads/cell drop-seq:400000 reads/cell 1a e vsx2–gfp smart-seq2 clustering + rf-type assignments tsne1 tsne2 1a 6 9 n rbc rbc rbc rbc rbc rbc rbc rbc rbc rbc rbc rbc rbc rbc rbc rbc rbc rbc rbc rbc rbcrbc rbc rbc rbc rbc rbc rbcrbc rbc rbc rbc rbc rbc rbc rbc rbc rbc rbc rbc rbc rbc rbc rbc rbc rbc rbc rbc rbc rbc rbc rbc rbc rbc rbc rbc rbc rbc rbc rbc rbc rbc rbc rbc rbc rbc rbc rbc rbc rbc rbc rbc rbcrbc rbc rbc rbc rbc rbc rbc rbc rbc rbc rbc rbc rbc rbc rbc rbc rbc rbc rbc rbc rbc rbc rbc rbc rbc mg mg mg mgmg mg mg mg mg mg mg mg mg mg mgmg mg mgmg mgmg mg 5a 5a 5a 5a 5a 5a 5a 5a 5a 5a5a 5a 5a 5a 5a 5a 5a 5a 5a 5a 5a 5a 5a 5a 7 7 77 7 7 7 7 6 6 6 6666 66 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 5c rbc 5c5c 5c 5c 5c 5c 5c 5c 5c 5c 1a1a 1a 1a 1a 1a 1a1a1a 1a 1a 1a 1a 3b3b3b 3b 3b 4 3b 3b 3b3b 3b 1b 1b 1b 1b 1b 22 2 5b 5b n 4 4 44 4 4 9 9 ro f −3 3 0 log expression single cells (n = 229) ordered by rf-assigned types 1a 1b 23b 8/9 4 5a 5c 6 7 mg rbc wfdc2 pcdh17 tacr3 wls nxph1 neto1 lhx3 irx6 prkar2b nnat grik1 col11a1 htr3a sox6 kcng4 apoe col9a1 dkk3 prkca rpa1 vstm2b areg slitrk5 cck lect1 igfn1 sec1 cpne9 genes also found in drop-seq analysis cluster-specific genes (n = 360) kcng4–cre × stop–yfp smart-seq2 clustering + rf-type assignments tsne1 tsne2 n n n n n n rd rd rd rd rd rd rd rd rd rd rd rdrd rd rd rd rd rd rd rdrd rd rd rd rd rd rd rd rd rd rd rd rd rd rd rd rd rd rd rd rd rd rd rd rd rd rd rd rd rd rd rd rd rd rd rd rd rd rd rd rd rd rd rd rd rd rd rd rd rd rd rd rd rd rd rd rd rd rdrd rd rd mg mg 1a 1a 5d 5d 5d 5d 5d 5d 5d 5d 5d 5d5d 5d 5d 5d 5d 5d 5d 5d 5d 5d 5d 5d 5d 5d 5d 5d 5d 5d 5d 5d 5d5d 5d 5d 5d 5d 5d 5d 5d 5d 5d 5d 5d 5d 5d 5d 5d 5d 5d 5d 5d 5d 5d 5d5d 5d 5d 5d 5d 4 8/9 8/9 5a 5a 5a 5a 5a 5a 5a 5a 5a 5a 5a 5a 5a 5a 5a 5a 5a 5a 5a 5a 5a 5a 5a 5a 5a 5a 5a 5a 5a 5a 5a 5a 5a5a 5a 5a 5a 5a 5a 5a 5a 5a 5a 5a 5a 5a 5a 5a 5a 5a 5a 5a 5a 5a 5a 5a 5a 5a 5a 5a 5a5a 5a 5a 5a 5a 5a 5a 5a 5a 5a 5a 5a 5a 5a 5a 5a 5a 5a 5a 5a 5a 5a 5a 5a 5a 5a 5a 5a 5a 5a5a 5a 5a 5a 5a 5a 5a 5a 5a 5a 5a 5a 5a 5a 5a 5a 5a 5a 5a 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 777 7 7 7 77 7 7 77 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7777 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 5c 7 5d 5a otx2 scgn grm6 isl1 cabp5 kcng4 htr3a 7 5d 5a sox6 bc046251 lrrtm1 kirrel3 igfn1 chrm2 slitrk5 known type 5 markers new type 5 markers i h g figure 7.(legend continued on next page) 1320 cell 166 1308–1323 august 25 2016 types using large numbers of cells profiled at shallow depth and then if desired re-sequence a subset at higher coverage for a deeper analysis (figure 7d).to sequence a smaller number of drop-seq libraries at a greater depth (figure 7d) amplified cdna from approximately 200 single- cell profiles from replicate 4 of batch 1 was tagmented by the above nextera xt protocol.10 significant pcs were identified by a permutation test and these pcs were used to cluster the cells based on the infomap method (k = 15) and also to independently embed these cells on a tsne map (figure 7e).encouragingly all the moderately sized clusters (n > 10) by the pca+louvain-jaccard method either consisted of a single rf type (figure 7e e.g. rbc bc5a mg) or more often of two closely-related types (e.g. bc3b-bc4 or bc1a-bc1b).here we found that a majority of cells within one of the four large clusters (n = 82) failed to be classified unequivocally (figure 7g).]
Patterns related to correlation between gene expression levels in single cells and bulk libraries, as well as between different single-cell datasets.

Text 98
10.1038/nature19348
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 1 | icgs ordering of the myeloid developmental hierarchy and derivation of regulatory states. a, schematic illustration of scrna-seq icgs workflow. b, heat map of genes delineated by icgs (excluding cell-cycle genes) in scrna-seq data (n=382 cells). columns represent cells; rows represent genes. gene expression clusters were generated in altanalyze using the hierarchical-ordered partitioning and collapsing hybrid (hopach) algorithm. icgs cell clusters are indicated (top). hscp-1, haematopoietic stem cell progenitor; hscp-2; meg, megakaryocytic; eryth, erythrocytic; multilin, multi-lineage primed; mdp, monocytedendritic cell precursor; mono, monocytic; gran, granulocytic; and myelocyte, myelocytes and metamyelocytes. flow cytometric identifiers are indicated (bottom). icgs guide genes are displayed (right). c, plots displaying the incidence and amplitude of selected genes delineated by icgs. d, icgs clustering of gmp cell populations (n= 132). e, transcriptionfactor-to-gene correlation analysis of gmps. heat map displays hopach clustering of pearson correlation coefficients among genes and transcription factors in designated icgs clusters from d. columns represent genes. rows represent transcription factors. f–i, scatter plots generated in r (using the pairs function) show expression levels in transcripts per million mapped reads (tpm) of select transcription factor pairs in individual gmp cell populations. colour key for icgs clusters (bottom). pearsoncorrelation coefficient is indicated (top).']. Reference sentences:[icgs resolved nine hierarchically ordered cellular states (fig 1b) that encompassed all those described above.notably the unbiased icgs analysis inferred a developmental order that agreed with the experimentally determined haematopoietic sequence19 (fig 1b bottom).next we displayed the incidence and amplitude of expression of key genes within the predicted icgs haematopoietic hierarchy (fig 1c).they also manifested infrequent and variable-amplitude expression of megakaryocytic erythroid granulocytic and monocytic genes (fig 1c).clustering of pearson-correlation coefficients for icgs-delineated transcription factor–gene pairs (fig 1d e and extended data fig 6g–j) revealed three distinct regulatory states within gmp cells (fig 1e).2 | n a t u r e | v o l 0 0 0 | 0 0 m o n t h 2 0 1 6 letter research to infer regulatory interactions among transcription factors that are reflective of granulocytic and monocytic specification their pairwise expression was correlated with cellular genomic states (fig 1f–i and extended data fig 7a).notably gfi1 and irf8 which are required for normal granulopoiesis and monopoiesis respectively911122425 displayed strong partitioning within granulocyte-specified versus monocyte-specified cells (fig 1f).these were eosinophilic progenitor cells based on data from cfu assays cytospins and flow cytometry30 (extended data fig 10a–h).to test this we analysed the ig2 subpopulation (fig 4a and extended data fig 10i) which lacks bipotential progenitors (cfu-gm) and are highly enriched for cells undergoing lineage specification resulting in cfu-g and cfu-m. hscp gene expression waned in the ig2 subpopulation and gfi1 and irf8 were co-expressed.in contrast the gg1 and ig1 subpopulations which both contain the bipotential progenitors (cfu-gm) were enriched for cells expressing key hscp genes (extended data fig 10j k) linking the hscp gene expression module with cfu-gm developmental output.analysis of their genomic states revealed that they like the ig2 subpopulation of cells were primarily distributed between the monocytic- and granulocytic-specified cells (fig 4b and extended data fig 10l) a finding underscored by the quantitative indexing of mono- cytic and granulocytic signature genes (fig 4c).b hopach clustering of wild-type ig2 and irf8−/− gfi1−/− gmp cell populations based on icgs-delineated genes (fig 1b) with indicated myeloid cellular states (right) (see global analysis in extended data fig 10l).the median expression value of a gene within cells of designated group was compared to its median value in all cells (extended data fig 10l) and average fold change (log2 ± s.e.m.)letter research cd34 c-kit gr-1 cd16/32 lk cd34+ before after 250pg 175pg 125pg 100pg 75pg single cell expression bulk expression single cell expression bulk expression single cell expression bulk expression lsk cmp gmp tpm (log2 scale) genes (log10 scale) 0 5 10 15 20 0 2 1 4 3 average low high reads 3.33 million 1.55 million 6.24 million expressed genes (tpm> 1) 4202 (total # of genes = 15269) 1542 6494 rsem align % (unique) 54.3% 16.3% 80% (after removing 12 outliers out of 382 libraries) 100 200 300 400 500 number of single cells 0 102 103 104 105 106 107 number of aligned reads r=0.8 r=0.83 r=0.87 0 2000 4000 6000 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 fraction reads aligned tpm > 1 lsk cmp gmp lk cd34+ sca-1 cd34 c-kit cd16/32 gr-1 lt-hsc st-hsc mpp monoblast cmp gmp myeloblast pro myelocyte meta myelocyte mep sca-1 c-kit cd34 cd16/32 lk gmp lsk cmp a b c d e g h i f j extended data figure 1 | experimental design optimization quality control and validation of scrna-seq data.i histogram showing the inverse-cumulative count of genes for each sequenced cell greater than the tpm cut-off in each bin (200 bins red samples represent outliers from extended data fig 1h).d column plots displaying the incidence and amplitude of expression of select genes (in fig 1b icgs-clustered order is shown as ‘clusters’ at the top).scatter plots generated in r (using the pairs function) show tpm of select transcription factor pairs in individual gmp cell populations (colours corresponding to icgs groups in fig 1d top).for gel source data see supplementary fig 1. c taqman analysis of gene expression in csf1r− and csf1r+ gmp cells with or without doxycycline induction of g3gv using one allele encoding rtta-m2.b icgs analysis of gg1 cells with cells spanning the entire myeloid developmental spectrum (fig 1b).gg1-like cells were identified by comparing centroids from c to those from fig 1b.letter research k l j gates clusters myeloid progenitor monocytic granulocytic dc nk erythroid hsc/mpp hscp-1 hscp-2 meg eryth multi-lin mdp mono gran myelocyte ig2 gfi1-/- irf8-/- ig1 ig2 ig3 gmp csf1r irf8-gfp irf8 789 6 5 gfp tga gfp atg tga gfi1 gg2 gg1 gg3 gmp csf1r gfi1-gfp 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 0.0 0.5 1.0 ig1 ig2 ig3 ig1 ig2 ig3 ig1 ig2 ig3 gg1 gg2 gg3 gata2 0.0 0.5 1.0 gata1 0.0 0.5 1.0 gg1 gg2 gg3 gg1 gg2 gg3 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 pbx1 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 meis1 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 junb 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 fos 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 egr1 gata2 gata1 pbx1 meis1 junb fos egr1 lat gfi1b 2b 0rik b s2 f13 lsk cmp gg1 ig2 gmp lk cd34 i bex6 irf8 f13a1 hp tfec arsb trim45 tnfs hk3 flot2 sgm ets1 cebpe prkc 110001g2 camp id2 ltfpigr mapk13 klf1gata1 mfsd pbx1 gata2 ikfzf2 meis1 tsc22d1 eltd1 fstl1 mn1 egr1 btg2 hlf g siglecf ccr3 e 0 50 100 % g m gm il5 + scf cfu # 55 15 65 40 28 1 0 0 gmp gg1gg2 gg3 il3 gm-csf 0 50 100 % cfu # gmp f c d b a h gg1gg2 gg3 il5 scf il3 gm-csf + + - + 10 + + - + il3gm-csf il5 scf + + - + 0 20 40 60 80 relative expression epx 0.0 0.5 1.0 il5ra 0.0 0.5 1.0 relative expression gg1 gg2 gg3 gg1 gg2 gg3 prg2 0.0 0.5 1.0 gg1 gg2 gg3 0.0 0.5 1.0 0.0 0.5 1.0 ig1 ig2 ig3 ig1 ig2 ig3 0.0 0.5 1.0 ig1 ig2 ig3 0 2 4 6 8 5 0 epx il5ra prg2 epx il5ra prg2 gg1 ig2 gata1 il5ra epx prg2 gfi1 10 extended data figure 10 | see next page for caption.letter research extended data figure 10 | clustering intermediates and irf8−/− gfi1−/− double-knockout gmp cells.i icgs of gg1 and ig2 cells with cells spanning the entire myeloid developmental spectrum (fig 1b).hopach hierarchical clustering of all cells from fig 1b as well as ig2 and irf8−/− gfi1−/− double-knockout single-cell libraries.only genes from fig 1b and in the previously clustered results were included.]
Summary: Correlation patterns between transcription factors and genes in single-cell myeloid development were identified using icgs clustering.

Text 99
10.1038/nature19348
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 2 | counteracting gene regulatory network underlying myeloid cell fate determination. a, hopach clustering of wild type, irf8−/− and gfi1−/− gmp cell populations using gfi1- or irf8-correlated genes derived from scrna-seq of wild-type gmp cells (ρ> 0.3, tpm >1). genotypes and cell clusters of irf8-high (blue) and gfi1-high (green) or neither (purple) are indicated, along with genes shared with icgs. b, chip–seq analysis of gfi1 and irf8 in gmp cells. statistically enriched gfi1 (p= 6.63 × 10−8) and ets-irf composite element (eice) motifs (p= 1.08 × 10−6) are displayed. venn diagram illustrates gfi1, irf8 and overlapping chip–seq peaks. c, integrative k-means cluster heat map of overlapping gfi1 and irf8 peaks (656 genomic regions). corresponding atac–seq analysis in gmp cells (gse60103) and h3k4me2 chip–seq']. Reference sentences:[given their reciprocal expression we analysed the consequences of gfi1 or irf8 loss on genes strongly correlated with their expression within wild-type gmp cells (fig 2a).loss of either transcription factor reduced the heterogeneity of genomic states manifested at the single-cell level (fig 2a).furthermore loss of irf8 or gfi1 reciprocally perturbed the expression of transcription factors that were associated with the monocytic (klf4 zeb2 and irf5) and granulocytic (per3 and ets1) regulatory states respectively (fig 2a and extended data fig 7b c).to explore the underlying molecular mechanisms we performed chromatin immunoprecipitation with sequencing (chip–seq) analyses in gmp cell populations (fig 2b).intersection of the gfi1 and irf8 peaks revealed the presence of shared regions that were deemed accessible in gmp cells based on assay for transposase-accessible chromatin with sequencing (atac–seq) data27 (fig 2b c).the shared genomic regions displayed increased h3k4me2 levels upon gfi1 loss (fig 2c) or lsd1 inhibition correlating with enhanced monocytic potential (extended data fig 7d e).in cd115+ gmp cells inducing gfi1 repressed monocytic gene expression (including irf8) and induced neutrophil gene expression in a dose-dependent manner (fig 2d).in agreement with regulatory-state (fig 1e) and loss-of-function (fig 2a) analyses key transcription factors were reciprocally altered by increased expression of gfi1; klf4 zeb2 and irf5 were repressed whereas ets1 and gates clusters b myeloid progenitor monocytic gran dc nk erythroid hsc/mpp clec4d gfi1b mfsd2b gata1 slc45a3 nfia car1 klf1 lyz1 mapk31 camp gfi1 tmem53 s100a8 trem3 cebpe prkcb chd7 far2 tanc1 kcnip3 tfec med21 sgms2 f13ai irf8 ctss batf3 ifi205 mycl slamf7 pigr gm17757 sox4 ptrf gata2 meis1 ctla2a hlf tsc22d1 mpl ikzf2 mecom pbx1 fosb btg2 egr1 c gran mono mdp multi-lin eryth hscp-1 hscp-2 meg gran mono mdp multi-lin eryth hscp-1 myelocyte hscp-2 meg clusters gates lsk cmp gmp lk cd34+ d ikzf2 gata2 meis1 tsc22d1 rabep2 hlf btg2 klf6 junb egr1 ctse lgals3 klf4 tpm4 irf8 f13a1 irf5 slfn2 1100001g20rik ets1 pilrb1 jag1 cebpe s100a8 chd7 rhou gfi1 prkcb pglyrp1 afap1 e per3 gfi1 ets1 cited2 mlx zfp518b irf8 klf4 irf5 zeb2 tsc22d1 klf2 klf6 jun fos fosb egr1 junb btg2 egr2 gata1 gata2 ikzf2 meis1 gfi1b tal1 pbx1 hlf prdm5 zbtb9 ncam1 s100a8 itgam camp cd97 ly6a ctse csf1r ly86 itga1 il10ra cxcr4 cebpe myelocyte irf8 irf8 irf8 per3 klf4 = = 0.42 gfi1 0 4 8 0 4 8 = = 0.53 0 4 0 4 8 = = –0.44 0 6 gfi1 0 4 8 0 4 zeb2 0 4 8 = = 0.43 mono gran multi-lin f g h i multi-lin mono gran filter correlation 15k genes 12k genes 1300 genes 850 genes pioneering round reduce cluster size select initial guide genes select additional guide genes final cluster using all guide genes correlate guide genes to all genes 649 genes 596 genes gene 1 gene 2 gene 3 gene 4 gene 5 gene 6 gene 7 gene 9 gene 8 gene 1 gene 2 gene 3 gene 4 gene 5 gene 6 gene 7 gene 9 gene 8 gene 10 gene 11 gene 13 gene 12 gene 1 gene 2 gene 3 gene 4 gene 5 gene 6 gene 7 optimize clusters a satb1 mecom flt3 meis1 gata2 mpl vwf pf4 itga2b(cd41) epor klf1 gata1 gfi1b cebpa spi1 ctsg mpo elane slpi ly86 csf1r irf8 klf4 gfi1 cebpe s100a8 camp mmp9 –4.5 0 4.5 –3.2 0 3.2 –0.4 0 0.4 figure 1 | icgs ordering of the myeloid developmental hierarchy and derivation of regulatory states.the perturbation and chip–seq data were used to assemble a gene regulatory network underlying myeloid cell fate specification (fig 2e).letter research 0.0 4.5 differential expression (log2) 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 101112 a c e g b d f h −4 −3 −2 −1 0 −6 −4 −2 component 2 component 1 state 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 −4.5 0.0 4.5 differential expression (log2) 1 82 9 3 6 7 5 4 lsk cmp gmp lk cd34+ lsk cmp gmp lk cd34+ lsk cmp gmp lk cd34+ lsk cmp gmp lk cd34+ 14 12 6 9 7 2 3 10 8 11 14 1 9 2 3 8 5 0 1 2 3 4 5 −60 −40 −20 0 20 40 60 −40 0 20 40 dim 2 1 1 1 11 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 11 1 1 11 1 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 22 2 2 2 22 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 22 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 3 3 3 3 33 3 3 3 3 333 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 33 3 3 3 3 3 33333 3 3333 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 444 444 4 4 4 4 55555 5 5 5 5 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 66 66 66 6 666 6 6 66 6 666 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 7 7 7 7 77 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 777 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 88 8 8 8 8 88 88 88 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 88 9 99 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 99 99 9 9 99 9 9 99 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 10 10 10 1010 10 10 10 10 1010 10 10 10 101010 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 1111 11 1111 11 11 11 11 11 11 11 11 11 11 11 11 11 11 11 11 11 11 11 1111 11 11 11 11 11 121212 1212 12 12 12 121212 12 12121212 12 12 13131313 13 13 13 1313 13 1313 13 13 13 13 13 13 13 13 13 13 14 15 9 3 13 2 7 11 8 10 1 4 6 12 5 −4.5 0.0 4.5 differential expression (log2) cell cycle −4.5 0.0 4.5 differential expression (log2) dc 8- th p=0.013 (c15) t 4fp3- sp p=0.027 (c15) tgd th p=0.042 (c15) gn arth bm p=1e-15 (c5) gn bm p=1e-11 (c5) mo 6c+ii- bm p=1e-05 (c14) gn arth bm p=0.000 (c14) gn bm p=0.000 (c14) gn arth synf p=0.003 (c14) nk mcmv1 sp p=1e-10 (c12) nk mcmv7 sp p=1e-10 (c12) nk b2m- sp p=1e-10 (c12) nk h+ mcmv1 sp p=1e-09 (c12) sc lt34f bm p=0.000 (c6) pret dn2 th p=0.011 (c4) pret etp th p=0.012 (c4) pret dn2a th p=0.015 (c4) b fre bm p=0.023 (c4) pret etp th p=4e-07 (c1) sc ltsl bm p=3e-10 (c8) sc mep bm p=3e-10 (c8) gn arth bm p=2e-13 (c13) gn bm p=2e-13 (c13) prob clp bm p=0.000 (c13) gn arth bm p=2e-09 (c9) mo 6c+ii- bm p=3e-09 (c9) cell states gates gates cell states gates gates cell states −4.5 extended data figure 2 | analysis of scrna-seq data with monocle scuba raceid and principle component analysis.b plots displaying the incidence and amplitude of expression of select genes in fig 2a.hopach clustering of gfi1−/− and irf8−/− gmp cells using haematopoietic guide genes from fig 2a.]
Summary: Patterns of gene expression correlated with gfi1 and irf8 in myeloid cells, affecting regulatory states and cell fate determination.

Text 100
10.1016/j.cell.2016.08.052
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 3. transcriptional profiling of mtà/à enables uncoupling of activation and dysfunction in cd8+ tils (a) outline of experimental strategy. b16f10 melanoma was used. (b) pca analysis of wt and mtà/à dn, sp, and dp til populations. (c and d) bar plots for the means of the pc1 (c) and pc2 (d) values for the dn, sp, and dp subpopulations. error bars are the sem estimator. p values for significance are computed using standard t test. p < 0.05, p < 0.01. (e) correlations of pc1 and pc2 values with various signatures. pc1 shows strong positive correlation with an in vivo cd8+ activation signature (sarkar et al., 2008), a cd8+ viral exhaustion signature (doering et al., 2012), and our cluster 2 gene signature (figure 1b) and strong negative correlation with a naive cd8+ and a memory cd8+ signature (msigdb [subramanian et al., 2005], star methods). see also figure s3 and table s3.']. Reference sentences:[the first principle component (pc1; 38% of variance) distin- guished the dn sp and dp populations of cd8+ tils similarly for wt and mt=/= mice and in a manner reﬂecting their transcrip- tional activation status (figure 3b x axis; black blue red respec- tively).in both wt and mt=/= the dn sp and dp profiles had respectively increasing scores on pc1 with dp populations scoring highest (figure 3c).indeed cell-cycle-associated signatures were highly enriched for the pc1 loadings (p < 10=3 gsea pre-ranked test table s3); a signature for cd8+ in vivo activation (sarkar et al. 2008) was posi- tively correlated with pc1 (figure 3e and star methods); and naive and in-vitro-activated cd8+ t cells isolated from non-tu- mor-bearing wt mice had low and high pc1 scores respectively (figure s3).interestingly previously annotated signatures of t cell dysfunction/exhaustion (doering et al. 2012) and our cluster 2 gene signature (figure 1d) were also positively correlated with pc1 (figure 3e) consistent with the coupling between activation and dysfunction/exhaustion.conversely while pc2 (8.4% of variance) clearly distin- guished the dn sp and dp cd8+ til populations from wt mice it did not distinguish between these populations from mt=/= mice (figure 3d) and did not separate naive and in-vi- tro-activated t cells (figure s3).to test the relevance of our newly identified modules to human tumors we compared our module scores to two signatures we recently obtained from cd8+ tils from melanoma patients by b e c d pc2 mean pc1 mean −50 −25 0 25 50 wild type (mean ) knock out (mean ) 31 2 1 cd8 in vivo activation 2 lcmv exhaustion 3 cluster 2 signature 4 memory cd8 5 naïve cd8 −20 0 20 −1.0 −1.0 −0.5 −0.5 0 0 0.5 0.5 1.0 1.0 wild type wild type mt–/– mt–/– dp sp dn dp sp dn a dp (tim3+ pd1+) sp (tim3– pd1+) dn (tim3– pd1)– dp (tim3+ pd1+) sp (tim3– pd1+) dn (tim3– pd1)– function similar function mt–/– wt implant tumor wait 2–3 wks cd8+ t-cells −40 −20 0 20 40 −20 −10 0 10 20 pc1 pc1 pearson coefficient pc2 pc2 −40 −20 0 20 40 −20 −10 0 10 20 pearson coefficient dn sp dp dn sp dp dn sp dp dn sp dp 4 5 figure 3.three samples were excluded from further analysis due to poor sequencing quality and three additional samples were excluded due to being strong outliers on the first three principle components of the initial pca (generated as described in next section; a trend similar to pc2 of figure 3b but not significant was observed on pc4 prior to the latter sample exclusion).overlay of naive and in vitro activated cd8+ t cell transcriptomes on pc1 and pc2 related to figure 3 naive cd8+cd62lhicd44low were isolated from c57bl/6 mice by cell sorting and stimulated in vitro with plate bound anti-cd3/anti-cd28.]
Patterns related to correlation between activation and dysfunction/exhaustion in CD8+ TIL populations were shown in PCA analysis.

Text 101
10.1016/j.cell.2016.08.052
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 5. the dysfunction and activation transcriptional programs are negatively correlated at the single-cell level (a) expression of the dysfunction module at the single-cell level is negatively correlated with expression of the activation module (left, r = à0.42) and of an in vivo cd8+ activation signature (sarkar et al., 2008) (right, r = à0.47). (b) expression of an in vivo cd8+ activation signature at the single-cell level is positively correlated with expression of (left to right) the activation module (r = 0.57), the activation/dysfunction module (r = 0.79), a viral lcmv exhaustion signature (r = 0.85), and the cluster 2 genes (figure 1b) (r = 0.68). (c–e) a tsne visualization (van der maaten and hinton, 2008) of the 1,061 single-cells analyzed, colored by (c) the partitioning into seven clusters (infomap), (d) gene signatures of the four gene modules defined (by quantile), and (e) mouse type (wt or mtà/à). (f) association of different gene signatures with the single-cell clusters (xl-mhg test, threshold at top 30% of list). dashed line marks p = 0.05 significance threshold. (g) counts of cells from wt/mtà/à in the different clusters. clusters significantly enriched for presence of wt (blue) or mtà/à cells (red) are marked. p < 0.05, p < 0.01, p < 0.001 (hypergeometric test). see also figure s4.']. Reference sentences:[the activation and dysfunction module scores were nega- tively correlated across cells (figure 5a) such that a higher figure 4.in contrast (figure 5b) the expression of the in vivo cd8+ activation signature (sarkar et al. 2008) posi- tively correlated with that of our annotated activation and activation/dysfunction signatures as well as with the expres- sion of a previously annotated signature of viral exhaustion (doering et al. 2012) and our cluster 2 signature (figure 1b).3 5 6 7 4 1 2 cluster 5 3 7 4 1 2 6 a c f g d e −2 0 2 4 −4 −2 0 2 4 6 8 activation module cd8 in vivo activation cluster count dysfunction module −5 0 5 10 15 cd8 in vivo activation −5 0 5 10 15 cd8 in vivo activation −5 0 5 10 15 cd8 in vivo activation −5 0 5 10 15 cd8 in vivo activation −5 0 5 10 15 wild type knock out wild type knock out wild type knock out wild type knock out act / dys module activation module dysfunction module naïve / memory-like module 0 50 100 150 200 250 300 memory cd8 naïve cd8 naïve / memory module dysfunction module act / dys module activation module cd8 in vivo activation top 20% 20–40% 40–60% 60–80% 80–100% 4 0 2 –log10 (p-value) b activation module lcmv exhaustion cluster 2 signature act / dys module −10 −5 0 5 10 −6 −4 −2 0 2 4 6 8 −2 0 2 4 −10 −5 0 5 10 15 tsne 1 tsne 2 −40 −20 0 20 40 tsne 1 −40 −20 0 20 40 −40 −20 0 20 40 tsne 1 tsne 2 −40 −20 0 20 40 tsne 1 −40 −20 0 20 40 tsne 1 −40 −20 0 20 40 tsne 1 −40 −20 0 20 40 −40 −20 0 20 40 tsne 2 −40 −20 0 20 40 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 significance threshold figure 5.cytokine and effector molecule expression in single-cell clusters 7 and 5 related to figure 5 centered and normalized rna levels are shown for different cytokines or effector molecules (rows) for each of the cells (columns) in clusters 5 and 7 from the single-cell analysis of figure 5.to correct for differences in library complexity between cells and allow a comparison at the single-gene level expression levels for all genes and cells analyzed (figure 5) were normalized by partitioning cells into 10 bins by their library complexity and conducting a median-normalization procedure for each gene as previously described (gaublomme et al. 2015).]
Patterns related to correlation between activation and dysfunction modules at single-cell level, with positive correlation of activation signatures and negative correlation of dysfunction signatures.

Text 102
10.1186/s13059-016-1045-6
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 3 time dynamics of the correlations between rna and protein abundance. a the density of rna:protein spearman correlation coefficients (ρ) by time point, with ticks displaying individual genes from the three time points (0 hr = purple, 24 hr = green, 48 hr = blue). b categorized by temporal correlation pattern, the correlations of the same gene across time points are juxtaposed. , p value < 0.05; , p value < 0.01. c, d translational control of met protein expression. c approximate primer (red) locations for assays used to dissect splicing status of met transcripts. refseq entries nm_000245.2 (short form) and nm_001127500.1 (long form) are the two reported splice isoforms of the met transcript. the thinner gray bar indicates the segment included in the long form but not in the short form. assay met.1_r detects unspliced rna; met.2_r detects long form spliced rna and, at reduced efficiency, unspliced rna but was determined to not be quantitative by population lysate dilutions (additional file 3: figure s3b); met.3_r detects unspliced rna; met.4_r detects long form spliced rna and unspliced rna at equal efficiency; met.5_r detects short form spliced rna and, at reduced efficiency, long form spliced rna; met.6_r detects both spliced forms and unspliced rna with equal efficiency. d distributions of spliced met rna (left) and met protein at the three time points used in this study']. Reference sentences:[for all rna-protein pairs we calculated spearman correlation coefficients (ρ) at each time point (see “methods”) obtaining an average (± standard deviation) correlation value of 0.25 (±0.23) 0.27 (±0.16) and 0.25 (±0.20) for the 0 hr 24 hr and 48 hr treatment time points respect- ively (fig 3a).finally between 24 and 48 hr hif1a igf1r and igfbp3 rna and protein decrease in correlation while eif4ebp1 and plau increase (fig 3b).thus even individual cel- lular perturbations can yield complex and heteroge- neous rna and protein responses across single cells (fig 3a b additional files 10 11 and 12: figures s9 s10 and s11).one particularly striking gene in fig 3b is met which has negligible correlation between protein and rna levels in untreated cells (ρ = 0.03) but a strong positive correlation after pma treatment (ρ = 0.53 and 0.42 for 24 and 48 hr cells respectively).figure 3c shows this portion of the met gene and the six assays we designed and deployed to interrogate the two isoforms previously known to exist in this segment of the met transcript as well as the unspliced transcript (primer sequences provided in additional file 1: table s7 all of which were determined to be quantitative from population dilution experiments except met.2_r).figure 3d shows the distributions of met_p and met.5_r (short isoform spliced) for 0 hr 24 hr and 48 hr.in examining the met family cells positive for the original met_r sta assay (full length; fig 3c) not surprisingly express met.1_r (unspliced) met.3_r (intron 9) and met.4_r (long isoform and unspliced) at a higher fre- quency and met.1_r met.3_r met.4_r and met.6_r (exon10) at higher levels.statistically signifi- cant changes in correlation were noted in the text and fig 3b if the delta correlation between any two time points had a probability less than 0.05 of being drawn from the null distribution.]
Patterns of correlation between RNA and protein levels vary over time, with some genes showing strong positive correlations after treatment.

Text 103
10.1186/s13059-016-1045-6
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 4 determining intracellular circuits from known and in silico discovered networks. a heatmap showing cell vs. cell correlation across a circuit scaled such that the maximum of both sta & pea measurements are 1. the circuit is regulated by casp8, with gates along the top indicating casp8_p detection (white) or lack thereof (black) and time point (0 hr = purple, 24 hr = green, 48 hr = blue). the two major clusters are labeled 1 (red) and 2 (blue). b–d changes in the spearman correlation network from the known casp8 circuit measured at 0, 24, and 48 hr, nodes grouped by edges. edges represent correlations greater than 0.3 between casp8 network and other targets. red text indicates protein; black text indicates rna; number of edges indicated by node size; colored boxes adjacent to the clusters indicate the time points for which a correlation coefficient greater than 0.3 exists between the target and the casp8 network']. Reference sentences:[when we examined the correlation structure of these downstream targets along with casp8_r levels we did not see statistically significant separation between cells in which casp8_p is detected (white) and those in which it is not (black) (fig 4a cluster membership 1 versus 2 denoted by red and blue labels respectively p value = 0.67 fisher’s exact test).this included cell cycle controllers (myc_r apc_r pten_r mtor_r) and links to alternative modes of intracellular and intercellular regulation such as cell surface (il6r_r il6r_p tnfrsf10b_p icam1_p) and downstream signaling molecules (stat3_r smad4_r pparg_r) (fig 4b–d).we calculated edge-degree (the num- ber of edges shared with the casp8 seed network) for each target for each network and sized the nodes ac- cording to this rank (fig 4).]
Patterns of correlation between different targets and casp8 network at different time points, with no separation based on casp8_p detection.

Text 104
10.1016/j.cels.2016.08.011
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 2. the endocrine transcriptome is readily distinguished from the other cell types and across donors (a) plot comparing the average expression (log10, transcripts per million [tpm]) of donor 1 beta and acinar cells. genes with high differential expression are noted. (b) dendrogram showing relationships among the cell types in human (left) and mouse (right). the dendrogram was computed using hierarchical clustering with average linkage on the log10 tpm values of the highly variable genes. (c) same as (a) for the ductal cells of donors 1 and 3. (d) heatmap indicating correlations on the averaged profiles among donors for all cell types (star methods). (e) same as (a) for human beta cells of donor 1 and mouse beta cells of mouse 1. (f) heatmap indicating pearson’s correlations on the averaged profiles among common cell types for human and mouse.']. Reference sentences:[for example comparing the transcriptome of two cell type clusters in one human pancreas revealed a large number of significantly differentially expressed genes (figure 2a) with the three most highly expressed genes also among the most differentially expressed: ins iapp and cpa1.extending the analysis to all pairs of cell types detected in both humans and mice we computed the dendrogram shown in figure 2b.comparing this dendrogram with one based on the analogous mouse cell types we found a nearly identical pattern of relationships (figure 2b right).samples (human donors 1 and 3) we found a correlation of r2 = 0.92 (fig- ure 2c) well above the differences be- tween cell types within each donor (e.g. r2 = 0.72 in figure 2a) suggesting that the average transcriptome of cell types is conserved.overall cell types generally grouped together despite originating from different individuals (figure 2d).comparing across species we found that human and mouse beta cells are reasonably well correlated (figure 2e).comparing across all cell types common to both spe- cies (figure 2f) we found that the four endocrine cell types (alpha beta gamma and delta) are the most correlated.these sets are conserved across individuals (figure 2) and each cell type has dominant genes specifically expressed in that cell type.at the largest scale the cell types them- selves are conserved between mouse and human (figure 1) and the transcriptomes of these cell types are very similar (figure 2).]
Summary: Correlations in gene expression profiles among cell types across donors and species are observed, with endocrine cell types showing the highest correlation.

Text 105
10.1016/j.cmet.2016.08.018
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 4. correlation of a and b cell enriched gene expression in mice and humans (a) scatterplot of all homologous genes (black dots) and union of enriched genes (red dots) in a cells from mice and non-diabetic human organ donors. (b) scatterplot of all homologous genes (black dots) and union of enriched genes (red dots) in b cells from mice and non-diabetic human organ donors. see also table s4.']. Reference sentences:[comparison of the mouse transcriptomes with those from non-diabetic donors showed overall good corre- lation of homologous genes (black dots) with spearman’s rank correlation coefficients of 0.73 for a cells (figure 4a) and 0.78 for b cells (figure 4b).pyy fbp1 rbp4 and slc38a5 showed the reverse expression pattern (figure 4a; table s4).genes with high expression in mouse but not hu- man b cells were ucn3 gstm5 s100a1 adh1c fam151a prss53 cox6a2 bace2 ttyh2 sytl4 sdf2l1 frzb and prlr (figure 4b).this contrasts recent studies reporting b cell subpopulations with distinct α-cells a β-cells b gcg pyy r = 0.78 100 101 102 103 104 105 100 101 102 103 104 105 human (rpkm+1) mouse (rpkm+1) enriched other ins iapp g6pc2 ucn3 ttr r = 0.73 100 101 102 103 104 105 100 101 102 103 104 105 human (rpkm+1) mouse (rpkm+1) enriched other gpx3 aldh1a1 dlk1 figure 4.]
Summary: Correlation of enriched gene expression in a and b cells between mice and humans, with some genes showing reverse expression patterns.

Text 106
10.1038/ng.3678
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 4 cellular size and cell cycle phase affect the degree of dynamic arme. (a) observed allelic expression in primary mouse fibroblasts of large and small cellular size. the p value is from a two-sided wilcoxon test. (b) percentage of monoallelic expression in large and small primary mouse fibroblasts inferred by split-cell analysis. the p value is from a two-sided wilcoxon test. (c) scatterplot and pearson correlation of the percentage of arme and cell size (estimated by facs) in human t cells expanded ex vivo. (d) principal-component analysis (scatterplot of components 1 and 2) of fibroblasts using the top 100 genes with the most variable expression during the cell cycle, with cells colored according to cell cycle classification. expression threshold in a–d, rpkm > 20. (e) box plots of the percentage of arme in fibroblasts in different cell cycle phases. p values are from two-sided wilcoxon tests.']. Reference sentences:[]
Patterns of correlation between cellular size, cell cycle phase, and allelic expression levels in different cell types.

Text 107
10.1038/mp.2016.158
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 3. morphological features that correlate with action potential (ap) states. (a) stitched photos of a live patched neuron, which was filled with rhodamine (left) and morphogically reconstructed with neurolucida (right). (b) correlation of morphological measurements (rows) with ap types (columns 1–5). the values in the central heat map represent the median for the neurons in respective ap type categories. to illustrate the direction of the measurement variations between ap types, we color coded the heat map (values normalized by row with mean = 0 and variance = 1) from low to high values (blue, to white, to red). the last two columns show the spearman correlation coefficient (r) and significance (p-val) of the spearman’s rank correlation between the electrophysiological measures (row) and the numerical class (1–5) of ephys type. the properties were sorted by decreasing correlation coefficient. (c) mean soma diameter significantly increased in more functional ap types. (d) sholl analysis revealed that more functional ap types had significantly more complex dendritic/axonal arborization. mann–whitney u two-tailed tests were performed at 20, 50 and 100 µm between different types. the dendritic complexities of type 4 and 5 neurons were not significantly different, and the complexity between types 1, 2, 3 was not either. however, types 4 and 5 were significantly more complex than types 1, 2, 3. mean ± s.e.m. shown. (e) the capacitance significantly increased in more functional ap types of neurons. significance threshold was p o0.05. mann–whitney u two-tailed p-values are shown in d, e.']. Reference sentences:[an inert red dye (rhodamine) and reconstructed their morphology (figure 3a).we analyzed 20 morphological features (listed in figure 3b; supplementary figure s3c) and found that the size of the soma and the complexity of neurite arborization increased in higher ap types (figures 3c and d).despite high cell-to-cell variabilities even within functional states the most highly functional neurons (i.e. ap type 5) tended to have overall significantly larger intracellular volume (figure 3e).this figure 3.]
Patterns of morphological features correlating with functional states of neurons, including soma size, dendritic complexity, and capacitance.

Text 108
10.1038/mp.2016.158
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 4. whole-single-cell rna-seq of patch-clamped neurons (patchseq). (a) the photos show an example of neuronal culture stained with egfp before and after a single neuron was patched and collected for transcriptome analysis. for every cell included in the analysis, the entire neuron was collected, including the soma/nucleus and neurites. the photos permitted us to confirm that only the patched neuron filled with rhodamine was collected, leaving the surrounding tissue intact. (b) following electrophysiological and morphological analyses of live neurons, the single cells were collected and their transcriptome processed for deep sequencing, bioinformatics processing and statistical analysis. (c,d) housekeeping genes such as actb and gapdh were detected in every cell. their expression levels were not significantly different between types of neurons and astrocytes. (e) significantly more genes were expressed in astrocytes and type 5 neurons compared with the other neuronal types. asterisks represent mann–whitney p-values o0.05. (f) the number of detected genes above 5 tpm did not significantly correlate with the size of the neurons, estimated here by capacitance. the action potential (ap) types are color coded in the graph (red t5, orange t4, green t3, blue t2, gray t1).']. Reference sentences:[molecular psychiatry (2016) 1 – 16 figure 4.images acquired before and after single- cell collection confirmed that only the targeted single cells were taken out leaving surrounding cells in place (figure 4a).impor- tantly we collected the entire neuron including the soma nucleus and neurites (figure 4a right panel).before rna-seq library preparation we subjected the cdna from each cell to a set of qc criteria to exclude potentially low- quality captures and amplifications (figure 4b).without these outliers an average of ~ 3000 genes per cell was detected above 45 tpm (figure 4e).interestingly the number of genes detected was significantly higher in type 5 neurons and astrocytes than in less active ap types (figure 4e).however we found no significant correlation between the number of detected genes (45 tpm) and the size of the cells (figure 4f).]
Patterns related to gene expression levels across different cell types, with more genes expressed in astrocytes and type 5 neurons compared to other neuronal types.

Text 109
10.1016/j.cell.2016.09.027
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure s6. oculomotor and trochlear, serotonergic, and dopaminergic neurons, related to figure 4 and 6 (a) examples of genes regulated along pseudotime in momtn. no genes were significantly downregulated. (b) validation of the induction of pvalb during maturation of momtn, shown alongside isl1 in sagittal sections of mouse embryos (in situ hybridization data from the allen developing mouse brain atlas) (scale bars 200 mm). (c) violin plots showing the expression of key genes involved in serotonergic synapse function, across all human cell types. (d) violin plots showing the expression of key genes involved in serotonergic synapse function, across all mouse cell types. (e) schematic of the function of genes in (c/d) in a serotonergic neuron, here drawn in place of their corresponding protein products (adapted from deneris and wyler, 2012). (f) spatial distribution of the five adult dopaminergic cell types (in situ hybridization data from allen mouse brain atlas) (scale bars 200 mm). (g) validation of ajap1 as a pan-dopaminergic marker in the adult mouse brain (scale bar left 100 mm; scale bar right 20 mm). (h) scatterplots showing the level of expression of genes expressed above baseline in matching cell types (left) and the correlation of the cell types that express the genes at higher levels (right)']. Reference sentences:[]
Summary: Correlation patterns of gene expressions in serotonergic and dopaminergic neurons across different cell types are shown.

Text 110
10.1016/j.cell.2016.09.027
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 1. cell populations and their distribution over time during human and mouse ventral midbrain development (a) overview of the time points sampled for human and mouse embryos. e, embryonic day; p, postnatal day; w, week. (b) illustration of the workﬂow of the experiment and the region dissected. (c) molecularly defined cell types of the human embryonic midbrain. dot plot shows time distribution of cell types, heatmap shows pairwise correlations, and bars show average number of detected mrna molecules per cell. cell types are named using anatomical and functional mnemonics prefixed by ‘‘m’’ or ‘‘h’’ to indicate mouse and human respectively: omtn, oculomotor and trochlear nucleus; sert, serotonergic; nbm, medial neuroblast; nbda, neuroblast dopaminergic; da0-2, dopaminergic neurons; rn, red nucleus; gaba1-2, gabaergic neurons; mnbl1-2, lateral neuroblasts; nbml1-5, mediolateral neuroblasts; nprog, neuronal progenitor; prog, progenitor medial ﬂoorplate (fpm), lateral ﬂoorplate (fpl), midline (m), basal plate (bp); rgl1-3, radial glia-like cells; mgl, microglia; endo, endothelial cells; peric, pericytes; epend, ependymal; opc, oligodendrocyte precursor cells. (d) molecularly defined cell types of the mouse embryonic midbrain. cell types are named as above (c). (e) human ventral midbrain single-cell transcriptomes visualized with t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding (t-sne), colored by the clusters defined in (c). contours are drawn to contain at least 80% of the cells belonging to the category. (f) mouse ventral midbrain single-cell transcriptomes visualized with t-sne, colored by the clusters defined in (d). contours are drawn to contain at least 80% of the cells belonging to the category.']. Reference sentences:[in addition we analyzed 1907 single-cell transcriptomes from the mouse ventral midbrain using a total of 271 embryos from 22 pooled litters covering six developmental time points (e11.5–e18.5; table a (3) cell capture (4) sequencing (1) dissection (2) cell suspension identity maturation patterning (5) analysis mouse d c e b f sampling frequency molecules pearson’s r 16k 0 e11.5 e12.5 e13.5 e14.5 e15.5 e18.5 mouse mdopaminergic msert momtn mnbl mgaba1 mnbml mperic mrgl mmgl mgaba2 mnprog mrn mendo mouse tsne1 tsne2 hendo hperic hmgl hopc hrgl2c hrgl2b hrgl2a hrgl3 hrgl1 hprogm hprogbp hprogfpl hprogfpm hnprog hnbm hnbml1 hrn hnbml5 hda0 hda1 hda2 hnbgaba hgaba hsert homtn −0.3 −0.2 −0.1 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 pearson’s r sampling frequency molecules 9k 0 w6 w8 w10 w11 w9 w7 human w6 w8w9w10 w11 w7 e11.5 e12.5 e13.5 e14.5 e15.5 e18.5 ~p21 human ventral midbrain −0.3 −0.2 −0.1 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 mendo mperic mmgl mepend mrgl3 mrgl2 mrgl1 mnprog mnbm mnbml2 mnbl2 mnbda mda0 mda1 mda2 mnbml1 mnbml3 mnbl1 mnbml4 mrn mgaba1b mgaba1a mgaba2 msert momtn mnbml5 mnbml5 momtn msert mgaba2 mgaba1a mgaba1b mrn mnbml4 mnbl1 mnbml3 mnbml1 mda2 mda1 mda0 mnbda mnbl2 mnbml2 mnbm mnprog mrgl1 mrgl2 mrgl3 mepend mmgl mperic mendo hdopaminergic hgaba homtn hneuroblast hnprog hfloorplate hbasalplate hperic hendo hopc hrgl2 hrgl3 hmgl homtn hsert hgaba hnbgaba hda2 hda1 hda0 hnbml5 hrn hnbml1 hnbm hnprog hprogfpm hprogfpl hprogbp hprogm hrgl1 hrgl3 hrgl2a hrgl2b hrgl2c hopc hmgl hperic hendo comparison tsne1 tsne2 figure 1.quality control of single-cell rna-seq related to figure 1 (a) distribution of number of mrna molecules detected in human cells.violin plots showing a selection of genes with specific expression in specific human cell types related to figure 1 each row shows violin plots depicting posterior probability distributions for the expected mean expression one for each cell type.violin plots showing a selection of genes with specific expression in specific mouse cell types related to figure 1 as in figure s2.transcription factor expression across mouse and human cell types related to figure 1 (a) the binarized expression of transcription factors in human embryos.]
Patterns related to correlation between cell types in human and mouse ventral midbrain development.

Text 111
10.1016/j.cell.2016.09.027
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 7. single-cell analysis of differentiated in vitro human esc and ipsc cultures and prototype-based scoring (a) expression of marker genes during the differentiation protocol measured by qpcr (solid lines) or inferred by pooling of single-cell rna-seq data per time point (dashed lines). red, hs401 cells; blue, h9 cells. (b) immunostaining of hipsc cultures (scale bar, 50 mm). (c) hesc-derived cell types compared with in vivo cell types. heatmap shows correlation based on genes that show specific expression in any in vivo cell type. pie chart (right) shows relative contribution of each cell line to each cluster. dot plot shows distribution of cells at different time points. (d) schematic of the inference of cell identity using prototype scoring. a machine learning model was trained on in vivo cell types (left) resulting in a reusable scoring function. stem cells were then scored and evaluated individually, without the need for clustering. typical visualization outputs of the machine learning model are shown in (g–i). (e) expression of selected genes of the dopaminergic lineage in human development, hesc-, and hipsc-derived cell types. (f) hipsc-derived cell types compared with in vivo cell types. heatmap shows correlation based on all genes that show specific expression in any in vivo cell type. bars (right) show relative abundances at 47 and 63 days in vitro.']. Reference sentences:[at day 47 most cells were positive for both foxa2 and lmx1a with 85% of the cells in the culture being foxa2+ and 21% th+ (figure 7b).cell 167 566–580 october 6 2016 575 a 0 max 0 20% 20% 47 days 63 days hesc derived cell clusters day12 day18 day35 hipsc derived cell clusters human scrna-seq stem cells derived scrna-seq in vitro differentiation machine learning single cells scored in out imn2 inb2 imn1 irn idac idab idaa inb1 iprog3 iprog2 iprog1 irgl2 irgl1 hendo hperic hmgl hopc hrgl2c hrgl2b hrgl2a hrgl3 hrgl1 hprogm hprogbp hprogfpl hprogfpm hnprog hnbm hnbml1 hrn hnbml5 hda0 hda1 hda2 hnbgaba hgaba hsert homtn enb4 enb3 enb2 enb1 erglf ergle ergld erglc erglb ergla eprog2b eprog2a eprog1b eprog1a h9 hs401 composition cell line percentage of cells -0.60 -0.30 0 0.30 0.60 pearson’s r embryo top scoring da cells stem cells top scoring progfp cells embryo stem cells da genes progfp genes hesc day 0 hesc day 12 hesc day 18 hesc day 35 hipsc day 47 hipsc day 63 nprog progfp ees progbp rgl gaba sert da omtn rn nbm nbml1 aldh1a1 slc6a3 bnc2 slc18a2 en1 gfra1 ddc th pbx1 klhl1 tmcc3 gria3 nr4a2 calb2 ebf2 nhlh1 neurod1 neurog2 tuj1/foxa2/th foxa2/lmx1a lmx1a/th day47 day63 day47 day63 hipsc b c d e g h hendo hperic hmgl hopc hrgl2c hrgl2b hrgl2a hrgl3 hrgl1 hprogm hprogbp hprogfpl hprogfpm hnprog hnbm hnbml1 hrn hnbml5 hda0 hda1 hda2 hnbgaba hgaba hsert homtn f percentage of cells 0.0 0.6 1.2 lmx1a 0.0 0.7 1.4 foxa2 0.0 0.6 1.2 nanog 0.0 0.8 1.6 pou5f1b d0 d12 d19 d35 0.0 0.8 1.6 nr4a2 d0 d12 d19 d35 0.0 0.9 1.8 th scrnaseq hs401 scrnaseq h9 rt-pcr hs401 rt-pcr h9 relative expression level 25 da 121 91 115 0.2 0.6 1.0 121 9 40 38 58 0.2 0.6 1.0 22 i human embryo da clusters hipsc da clusters hnbm hda0 hda1 hda2 enb4 enb2 enb3 idaa idab idac score score omtn gaba rn sert 0 max nr4a2 pbx1 gria3 th en1 tmcc3 ntm ddc camk2n1 aldh1a1 app pdzrn4 pcdh10 meg3 erbb4 slc10a4 bex5 foxa2 npy1r gpc2 slit2 ddc lmx1a linc00261 sulf1 mdk cdo1 ntn1 hes1 lipg vim spon1 fam84b foxa1 pvrl3 tacc3 zfhx3 pltp serpinf1 rfx4 figure 7.hipscs differentiated for 47 and 63 days gave rise to more mature cells including two radial glia-like cell types and three progenitors (figure 7f).the most mature dopaminergic cell type (idac) expressed key genes such as nr4a2 klhl1 pbx1 slc18a2 th ddc gfra1 or en1 (figure 7e).while endogenous midbrain cells showed distinct unambiguous iden- tities (figures s7j and s7k) hpsc-derived cells showed more intermediate forms (figure 7g).cell scoring using machine learning for the analysis on in vitro-derived cells (figure 7) our goal was to score the molecular identity of each cell relative to in vivo-defined cell types.stem cells differentiation protocol and machine learning performance and diagnostics related to figure 7 (a) schematic of the hescs in vitro differentiation protocol.(j) training dataset plotted on wheel plot as in figure 7g.(l) negative control cells are obtained by scrambling gene values of cells of the training dataset and are plotted on wheel plot as in figure 7g.]
Patterns related to correlation between hESC and hiPSC-derived cell types compared to in vivo cell types.

Text 112
10.1016/j.neuron.2016.10.001
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 8. correlations of the transcription profiles across the pyramidal layer (a) mrna counts in the cell bodies in the stratum pyramidale (sp) are grouped within each field of view. a single cell in the stratum radiatum (sr) is shown to illustrate individual mrna localization. stratum oriens (so) is labeled for orientation. (b) mrnas in different subregions of the pyramidal layer show both long-distance spatial correlations as well as local correlations between neighboring fields. both ca1 and dentate gyrus (dg) show high regional correlations. correlation is calculated based on data from the 125 gene experiment. (c) illustration of regional and long-distance correlation patterns observed in (b). correlated regions are colored, and long-distance correlations are shown as dotted lines with their median correlation coefficient written over the dotted line.']. Reference sentences:[indeed when we averaged the single-cell expression profile within each subregion of the ca1 we can reproduce the contin- uous correlation profiles found by bulk rna-seq between ca1v ca1i and ca1d (figure 8) (cembrowski et al. 2016).a b 0.8 0.4 0.0 0.4 0.8 sp 10987654321 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 fov ca1d ca1i ca1v ca3d ca3i ca3v dg 0.55 0.52 c 321 4 5 6 7 8 9 1011 12 13 14 15 16 17 21 1920 35µm sr so sp 18 5µm figure 8.]
Regional and long-distance correlations of gene expressions across different subregions in the pyramidal layer.

Text 113
10.1016/j.stem.2016.10.003
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 2. separation of two distinct lmx1a-positive and one lmx1a-negative pseudotime axes (a) (i) cells are colored as in figure 1b. the monocle’s pseudotime trajectory is depicted by a thick black line traversing though a sprawling minimum spanning tree. (ii) the cell density is plotted along pc1 and colored by pseudotime. blue: early pseudotime and red: late pseudotime. (b) (i–iii) euclidean distance heatmap of cells based on spearman correlation when considering the lineage intersect gene list. the clustering tree (left and top) divides into four main branches (i’: early lmx1a-positive cluster; ii’: late lmx1a-positive cluster; iii’: early lmx1a-negative cluster; and iv’: late lmx1a-negative cluster). the right hand bars indicate cells’ pseudotime age (blue: early and red: late), facs classification (green: gfp-positive and gray: gfp-negative), and assignment into either lmx1a-positive (green) or lmx1a-negative (red) lineages. (ii) the expression of mesda markers in lmx1a-negative (red) and lmx1apositive (green) lineages is shown. (iii) the expression of non-dopaminergic vmd markers in lmx1a-negative (red) and lmx1a-positive (green) lineages is shown. (c) t-sne network plot shows a left-to-right distribution of cells roughly conforming to their established pseudotime order. blue: early pseudotime and red: late pseudotime. (d) cells plotted as in (c). the assignment to either lmx1a-positive (green) or lmx1a-negative (red) lineages from figure 2b i is indicated. the t-sne plot separates into two parallel lmx1a-positive axes (axis-1 and axis-2) and one lmx1a-negative axis (lmx1a-neg). (e) t-sne plots displaying expression of known mesda markers.']. Reference sentences:[the monocle-derived pseudotime differentiation axis matched very closely with pc1 (figure 2a) showing the same distribution of cell age.spearman correlation clustering based on this gene set strongly divided into four main branches: two progenitor and two post-mitotic branches as indicated by the cells’ pseudotime values (figure 2b i).scatterplots depicting gene expression across these two groups confirmed our clustering with mesda neuron-specific genes including lmx1a lmx1b corin wnt1 th and pitx3 expressed at high levels in the lmx1a-positive group (figure 2b ii).conversely gli1 dlx1 gad1 lhx5 gata2 and isl1 were expressed at high levels in the lmx1a-negative group indicating as expected that non-dopaminergic neurons such as oculomotor neurons and gabaergic interneurons are included in this cluster (figure 2b iii).surprisingly however multiple classic dopa- minergic markers including corin msx2 en1 and pitx3 were confined to only axis-1 (figure 2e ii).]
Patterns related to correlation are observed in the separation of distinct cell clusters based on gene expression, pseudotime, and lineage markers.

Text 114
10.1038/nature20123
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 2 | stemness expression program and a developmental hierarchy in oligodendroglioma. a, average relative expression of genes most highly correlated with pc2 and pc3 (top), and selected astrocyte and oligodendrocyte genes (bottom), in stem-like cells, undifferentiated cells, oligodendrocyte-like and astrocyte-like cells (methods). genes were sorted by relative expression in stem-like cells. b, stemness genes are preferentially expressed in early human brain development. relative expression of pc2 and pc3 putative stemness genes (top) and oligodendrocyte and astrocyte marker genes (bottom) across 524 human brain samples (allen brain atlas). samples are ordered in columns by age, from prenatal (left) to adult (right). c, the stemness program is']. Reference sentences:[another 303 cells lacked detectable cnvs and clustered by gene expression into subsets that expressed microglia and mature oligo- dendrocyte markers respectively (extended data fig 2a).there was significant variation between the microglia cells with a set of pro- inflammatory cytokines (il1a il1b il8 and tnf) chemokines (ccl3 ccl4) and early response genes coordinately expressed by ~ 80% of the microglia (extended data fig 2b).these results were highly consistent across all six tumours and were not accounted for by technical or batch effects (extended data fig 2c–f and supplementary note 1).cells with high pc2 and pc3 scores had intermediate pc1 scores (fig 1c and extended data fig 2c e) suggesting a lack of differentiation and prompting us to explore additional programs.a total of 63 genes were associated with high pc2 and pc3 (fig 2a supplementary table 1 and methods) and several lines of evidence suggest that they repre- sent a ‘stemness’ program.expression of pc2- and pc3- associated regulators was highest in prenatal human brain and dropped significantly after birth suggesting a role in early neural development (allen brain atlas15 fig 2b p = 8 × 10−18 t-test).on the basis of these lines of evidence we separated cells with intermediate pc1 values into ‘undifferentiated’ (low pc2 and pc3) and ‘stem/ progenitors’ (high pc2 and pc3) cells (fig 2a).however pc2 and pc3 genes were not preferentially expressed in opcs; instead they were preferentially expressed in cells of neuronal lineage918 (extended data fig 3d) and upregulated upon activation of tri-potent mouse neural stem cells19 (nscs) (fig 2c extended data fig 3e; p = 3 × 10−6 t-test).pca of the npc profiles identified an expression program highly similar to the pc2 and pc3 associated program of tumour cells (fig 2c extended data figs 3f and 4e f and supplementary table 2; p = 2 × 10−35 t-test).b hierarchy plot as in fig 2d for mgh54 cells (n = 1174) with cycling cells colour-coded as in a. c hierarchy plot for the six tumours with each cell colour-coded based on the fraction of neighbouring cells (within euclidean distance of 0.3) that are cycling.plotting these scores across the cells of all six tumours revealed similarity to normal devel- opment (fig 2d) with a transition from stem/progenitor programs into differentiation along two glial lineages.notably the same archi- tecture was observed in each of the six tumours and also found when tested with a different method for scrna-seq (fig 2e extended data fig 5a e methods).although cycling cells were highly enriched among stem/ progenitors their frequency was low (~ 10%) even in that compartment; accord- ingly the pc2 and pc3 program did not include a signature for the cell cycle except for ccnd2 (fig 2a) a gene controlling cell cycle and self-renewal of glioma cscs24.we then compared pc1 gene scores between the original and the shuffled data (extended data fig 2f).both pc2 and pc3 were associated with intermediate values of pc1 (extended data fig 2c) and therefore with presumably less differentiated cells and both were correlated with a shared set of genes but distinguished by their correlation with cell ‘complexity’.letter research extended data figure 2 | see next page for caption.letter research extended data figure 2 | diversity of expression programs in oligodendroglioma.a shown are plots as in fig 2d for each of the six tumours with cycling cells coloured as in fig 3. b lineage and stemness scores for three tumours with high-depth profiling coloured based on sequencing batches demonstrating the lack of considerable batch effects.bottom lineage (x axis) and stemness (y axis) scores (defined as in fig 2d).b colour-coded density of cells across the cellular hierarchy as shown in fig 2e for the two clones (left: clone 1 right: clone 2) in each of the two tumours (top: mgh36 bottom: mgh97).]
Patterns related to stemness expression program and developmental hierarchy in oligodendroglioma, with gene expression correlated with stem/progenitor cells and early brain development.

Text 115
10.1038/NMICROBIOL.2016.206
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 3 | different bacterial loads correlate with divergent macrophage polarization transcription programs. a, mφs containing non-growing bacteria and bystander cells show characteristics of a proinﬂammatory immune response. left: gsea reveals a significant enrichment of rela and nfkb1 in cells from group ii (that is, mφs with non-growing bacteria and bystander cells, 28 cells) compared to group iii cells (mostly mφs with growing bacteria, 17 cells). the scheme in the middle outlines the proinﬂammatory response towards extracellular and intracellular salmonella sensing by the host (adapted from ref. 11). right: single-cell expression levels (nrc, normalized read counts) for selected host genes (tnf, cxcl10, spic, il1b) were plotted onto the pca map shown in fig 2b. this representation highlights the elevated expression levels of these genes in cells from group ii (mφs with non-growing bacteria and bystander cells), but also indicates the high extent of variability between individual members of the group. b,c, mφs with growing bacteria show a spectrum of m2-like activation. single-cell gene expression data for il4ra, fcgr2b (b) and arg1, s100a8 (c) are plotted on pca maps. expression of arg1 and s100a8 (c) was specific to a subpopulation within group iii, thus allowing for the refinement of these cells into groups iiia (low arg1, s100a8) and iiib (high arg1, s100a8). d, expression scores of genes from clusters a (immune and inﬂammatory response) and d (m2-like) as identified in fig 2c are plotted for the different subgroups of challenged cells. the box plots give the minimum, first quartile, median, third quartile and maximum of the data. an unpaired two-sample t-test was applied to obtain p. ns, not significant. tlrs, toll-like receptors.']. Reference sentences:[for these cells >99% of the reads passed our quality-control filters (supplementary table 1) and the majority of them (>60%) mapped to protein-coding genes (supplementary fig 3a).the dynamic range of the assay spanned over five orders of magnitude and single-molecule sensitivity was achieved with efficient detection (>90%) for transcripts with an absolute copy number >10 (supplementary fig 3bc).to further dissect the two main groups we applied principal com- ponent analysis (pca) (fig 2b) to all 60 cells including all genes whose expression exceeded technical noise (supplementary fig 3d) (see methods).comparison of clusters c and d (that is genes specifically expressed in group ii or group iii mφs; fig 2c) revealed an over-representation of the prototypical proinﬂammatory transcription factor nf-κb (p65 and nfkb1)16 and of several of its target genes in cluster c (tnf cxcl10 il1b) (fig 3a).11) were enriched in cluster c (fig 3a and supplementary fig 8a).these proinﬂammatory genes were heterogeneously expressed in group ii mφs (fig 3a and supplementary fig 8b).in addition to proinﬂammatory genes some group ii mφs expressed spic encoding the transcription factor spi-c (fig 3a).this calculation confirmed that cells differ- ing in the expression of prototypical arg1 and mrc1 also exhibited a reduced activity of the ‘inﬂammatory and immune response’ (cluster a) and an increased ‘m2-like status’ (cluster d) (fig 3d).based on these observations group iii may indeed be further divided into two distinct subpopulations: group iiia is a mixed mφ population containing both non-growing and growing salmonella and group iiib mφs contain only growing salmonella (fig 3cd and supplementary fig 9).we then analysed the expression levels of other immune genes expressed along with m2 markers in cells from group iiib (that is in cells with growing salmonella) and observed high expression levels of an antimicrobial calprotectin (s100a8)22 (fig 3c) and spp1 (secreted phosphoprotein 1; a.k.a.the ten mφs of group iiia were composed of cells containing growing salmonella and others harbouring non- growing salmonella (each five cells) (fig 3c and supplementary fig 9).however gene expression analysis showed a global decrease of ‘m2-like score’ compared to group iiib mφs (fig 3d) with the previously discussed m2 marker genes arg1 and mrc1 being heterogeneously expressed (fig 3c and supplementary fig 9).we classified the cells according to their level of il4ra expression and confirmed that il4ra identified above to be highly expressed in mφs infected with growing bacteria (fig 3b) can be used as a dis- crimination marker for the groups of proinﬂammatory and m2-like mφs (fig 4a).]
Patterns related to correlation between bacterial loads and macrophage polarization programs are shown. Proinflammatory response and M2-like activation patterns are highlighted.

Text 116
10.1038/NMICROBIOL.2016.206
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 4 | bacterial growth triggers a different mφ polarization pattern. a, 18 naive and 63 challenged cells (23 bystanders, 20 mφs with non-growing and 20 mφs with growing salmonella) were isolated and sequenced, and are ranked by increasing il4ra expression (log-transformed, row z-score). the original fc gate of each cell is given at the top (colour code at the bottom). again, three groups of challenged cells could be distinguished (il4ra−, il4ra+ and il4ra++). the heatmap displays the expression of genes associated with mφs containing growing and non-growing bacteria. b, mφs were infected with salmonella for 20 h before harvest, antibody staining and fc (n > 30,000 cells). cells were gated depending on the growth status of the bacteria as indicated in a, and the detected levels of il1b, arg1, il4ra (cd124) and cd86 were compared among the different mφ populations. error bars (standard deviation) are calculated for n independent biological replicates as indicated. a two-tailed one-sample t-test was applied to obtain p. c, working model depicting the correlation between different mφ activation programs and differentially growing salmonella. two distinct functional populations were found: a proinﬂammatory activation state dominated in mφs with non-growing salmonella and bystander cells, whereas an anti-inﬂammatory (m2-like) state prevailed in mφs with growing bacteria.']. Reference sentences:[however when projected onto two dimensions the cells fell into three distinct clusters following the same pattern obtained for pca (supplementary fig 4a): naive mφs segregated from the challenged mφs along the first dimension and along the second dimension bystanders and mφs with non-growing bacteria grouped together mock infection gfp intensity (a.u.)the existence of three clusters was further validated by k-means clustering embedded in the rare cell type identification (raceid) algorithm (see methods and supplementary fig 4b).after quality filtering (as above) this experiment comprised a total of 81 cells: 18 naive mφs 23 bystanders 20 mφs containing non-growing bacteria and 20 mφs containing growing bacteria (fig 4a and supplementary fig 10).we classified the cells according to their level of il4ra expression and confirmed that il4ra identified above to be highly expressed in mφs infected with growing bacteria (fig 3b) can be used as a dis- crimination marker for the groups of proinﬂammatory and m2-like mφs (fig 4a).flow cyto- metry (fc) analysis confirmed that in agreement with the tran- scriptomics data the il1b il4ra and arg1 proteins were differentially expressed in mφs with non-growing or growing bacteria whereas cd86 remained unchanged (fig 4b).discussion our results show that individual mφs carrying growing or non- growing salmonella have divergent gene activation programs as summarized in fig 4c.]
Patterns of mφ activation programs correlate with differentially growing bacteria, leading to distinct proinflammatory and anti-inflammatory states.

Text 117
10.1038/NMICROBIOL.2016.206
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 2 | single-cell rna-seq profiling reveals specific transcriptional signatures associated with mφs containing non-growing or growing salmonella. a, gene expression correlation between individual cells from distinct sorting fractions. the heatmap displays pearson’s r values clustered on the y axis by the euclidian method (dendrogram). this matrix revealed the existence of two major groups of cells corresponding to naive and challenged cells. colours indicate cellular identities as inferred from the original fc gates. b, pca allowed for a refinement of the group of challenged cells into groups ii and iii (group i: naive mφs). each dot represents a single cell (60 cells in total). colours indicate cellular identities as inferred from the original facs gates. c, transcriptional profiles specific to individual cell groups (60 cells in total). a total of 1,073 genes were differentially expressed, as identified by scde (p < 0.01; supplementary fig 7) among the three cell groups identified in b, and were grouped into individual gene clusters (a–d) and plotted as a heatmap. clusters a and b are derived by comparing naive cells to challenged cells, labelled respectively cell groups i and ii plus iii on the pca map. clusters c and d are derived by comparing cell groups ii and iii (supplementary fig 7 and supplementary table 2b–d).']. Reference sentences:[we confirmed (supplementary fig 2) that intra- cellular bacterial growth only starts 6 h post-internalization (h.p.i.first we used the pearson correlation coefficients associated with hierarchical clustering to measure similarity among the expression profiles of all cells (fig 2a).to further dissect the two main groups we applied principal com- ponent analysis (pca) (fig 2b) to all 60 cells including all genes whose expression exceeded technical noise (supplementary fig 3d) (see methods).the 15 naive mφs (group i) clearly segregated from the challenged mφs along the first pca component (fig 2b) whereas the challenged cells were discriminated along the second pca component.group ii (28 cells the second dimension (dim 2) > 0 (fig 2b)) contained all 15 bystander cells 11 of the 16 mφs with non-growing bacteria and two mφs with growing bacteria.group iii (17 cells dim 2 < 0 (fig 2b)) was domi- nated by mφs infected with growing bacteria (12/14) but also con- tained mφs with non-growing bacteria (5/16).genes related to ‘cell cycle’ and ‘dna replication’ (gene ontology (go) terms) are highly downregulated in challenged cells (fig 2c and supplementary fig 5) suggesting that cell cycle is not required for specific correction of the clustering.brieﬂy groups i ii and iii were compared in a pairwise manner and all differentially expressed genes (p < 0.01) were used for further analysis (supplementary table 2a–c and supplementary fig 7) and displayed on a heatmap (fig 2c).these genes formed four gene clusters termed a to d (fig 2c and supplementary table 2d).for example genes in cluster a include those of master regulators of an lps-induced immune response (iift1 stat2 irf7) several chemokines (ccl2 -3 -4 -5 and -7) as well as lcn2 which is linked to innate immunity to bacterial infections (fig 2c).the two top go terms for cluster a were ‘immune response’ and ‘inﬂammatory response’ (p < 1 × 10−10 fisher exact test; fig 2c).conversely gene cluster b containing genes downregulated in challenged mφs as compared to naive cells was enriched for metabolism-associated go terms (‘dna metabolism’ ‘cellular metabolic process’ p < 1 × 10−16 fisher exact test; fig 2c).both the above pca and scde analyses indicated that mφs with defined bacterial loads exhibit specific mrna expression programs (fig 2bc).comparison of clusters c and d (that is genes specifically expressed in group ii or group iii mφs; fig 2c) revealed an over-representation of the prototypical proinﬂammatory transcription factor nf-κb (p65 and nfkb1)16 and of several of its target genes in cluster c (tnf cxcl10 il1b) (fig 3a).right: single-cell expression levels (nrc normalized read counts) for selected host genes (tnf cxcl10 spic il1b) were plotted onto the pca map shown in fig 2b.d expression scores of genes from clusters a (immune and inﬂammatory response) and d (m2-like) as identified in fig 2c are plotted for the different subgroups of challenged cells.next to understand how mφs respond to growing bacteria we inspected gene cluster d which is highly specific to group iii mφs (fig 2c).thus to test whether arg1 and mrc1 expres- sing mφs (fig 2c and supplementary fig 9) indeed constitute a distinct functional subgroup we computed a ‘cluster score’ that rep- resents the expression of all genes in a cluster in one number (fig 2c; see methods).]
Patterns related to correlation between gene expressions in distinct cell groups, revealing specific transcriptional signatures associated with different cellular identities.

Text 118
10.1093/nar/gkw1214
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 4. activation of hsc and mpp1 in anemic mice. (a) the tsne patterns of hsc and mpp1 from control and anemic mice. different subsets of cells from the same tsne display are shown in each panel, with subsets labeled by the color scheme on the right side of the top lane. (b) ratio of cells falling into each subpopulation in hsc and mpp1 from control and anemic mice. in each image several subsets of the cells are displayed, identified by the color code in the right side upper rectangle. bhsc and bmpp1 are hsc and mpp1 obtained from mice made anemic by bleeding. (c) schematic graph of correlation between lineage specificity and the phase of the cell cycle. after induction of anemia by bleeding, hsc shift into the active cluster in map regions occupied by mpp1 cells in normal marrow.']. Reference sentences:[stimulation of erythropoiesis shifts hsc into active states to confirm that particular clusters represent quiescent cells that can become activated we performed single-cell rna- seq on hsc (bhsc) and mpp1 (bmpp1) from mice whose erythropoiesis had been stimulated by bleeding (figure 4 supplementary figure s9).the tsne analysis with 99 single cells with acceptable sequencing quality revealed that a higher fraction of hsc and mpp1 cells were in active states in acute blood loss mice than in control mice (figure 4a).approximately 80% of hsc were in either the u or quiescent clusters in normal mice but more than 70% of the hsc fell into the early g1 and g1/s stages of active cells in the anemic mice (figure 4b supplementary figure s10b) i.e.]
Summary: Correlation between lineage specificity and cell cycle phase shifts in response to anemia, leading to activation of hsc and mpp1 cells.

Text 119
10.1093/nar/gkw1214
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 3. correlation between cell cycle phase and expression of lineage-related genes. (a) the tsne patterns of g2/m (red), g1/s (orange) and early g1 states (purple) within the active cluster, along with the quiescent (blue) and u-cluster (black) cluster. (b) comparative analysis of g1/s, s, g2/m and m phase-specific genes in u-, quiescent- and three subdivisions of the active cluster. (c) gsea of lineage-specific genes in cells at various stages of the cell cycle in the active cluster. (d) cells plotted according to increasing g2/m gene expression. the log of expression of red (erythroid) and cyan (g2/m) genes per cell is shown. (e) the relation between expression of s phase and g2/m phase genes in each cell. cells are plotted according to their rank order of levels of g2/m genes. the lines are loess smoothed representations of the level of expression in each cell. the purple line represents the level of s phase genes and the red line the level of g2/m genes. the green line represents the ratio of s phase to g2/m genes.']. Reference sentences:[expression of genes characteristic of different lineages changes with the stage of the cell cycle we mapped the expression pattern of each cell to sets of genes differentially expressed in the g1/s or g2/m phase of the cell cycle as well as small sets of genes known to have s and g2 phase specific expression (5462) (supplementary table s5).based on the expression of stage- specific genes the active cluster was classified into three states: g2/m g1/s and early g1 (figure 3a).in the tsne patterns cells in the g2/m state lie at the tip of the branch of the graph containing active cells (figure 3a).genes of multiple lineages were often expressed in the same cell but the average relative levels of expression of the lineage-specific genes varied with the stage of the cell cycle (figure 3c.)we also plotted expression data in cells ordered according to the rank order of levels of expression of g2/m genes (figure 3d) and compared the pattern with that of s phase and g2m phase genes (figures 3e and 5d e).megakaryocyte and granulocyte precursor genes showed similar levels of expression relative to erythroid genes in the early g1 state of the active cluster (fdr = 0.031 and 0.086 respectively) and lower relative expression in g1/s and g2/m state (fdr>0.198) (figure 3c) although the megakaryocyte genes rose more than the granulocyte precursors genes in g2/m cells (figure 5d and e).the erythroid genes showed prominent up regulation in the g2/m (fdr = 0.003) and some up- regulation in g1/s state cells (fdr = 0.083) (figure 3c d and e).]
Patterns of lineage-related gene expression change with cell cycle phase, with distinct expression profiles in g2/m, g1/s, and early g1 states.

Text 120
10.15252/msb.20166969
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 4. dose–response analysis of a pdgfr mutant. a coverage of exome-seq (top left) and rna-seq reads (bottom left) in exon 7 of the pdgfra gene. the deletion targets the immunoglobulin-like domain ig5 of the pdfg receptor (center). 49% of pdgfra expressing cells express pdgfrad7 homozygously, another 49% express it heterozygously (right). b enriched gene sets (webgestalt, david, adj. p-value < 0.05) correlated to pdgfrad7. distributions of in-pathway genes in individual cells, sorted from low pdgfrad7 to high pdgfrad7. c an interaction network (generated via genemania) of physical and genetic interactions of transcription factors, whose recognition motifs are overrepresented (opossum, z-score ≥ 10, fisher score ≥ 7) in correlated genes. physical interactions are interactions between the protein products, identified from proteomics experiments. genetic interactions are changes in gene expression that occur when another gene is suppressed in a knockdown experiment.']. Reference sentences:[we also detected a small deletion in exon 7 that was broadly expressed (fig 4a).negatively correlating genes were enriched for oxidative phosphorylation (fig 4b).genetic and physical interaction databases were queried against significant transcription factors (fig 4c) implicating stat1 and nf-jb as downstream effectors of pdgfrad7.49% wt 2% pdgfra∆7 frequency in pdgfra expressing cells exon 7 exome-seq rna-seq chromosome 4 55133 mbp 55134 mbp ig1 ig2 ig3 ig4 ig5 tk1 tk2 pdgfra ligand binding dimerazation nf-kappa b complex genetic interaction physical interaction rora foxq1 elk4 zeb1 tead1 foxa2 stat1 foxd3 pdgfra rxra yy1 spi1 rel rela nfkb1 srf e2f1 tbp -4 -2 0 2 4 6 8 10 cell cycle p=1.6e-2 log2 cpm low pdgfra∆7 high pdgfra∆7 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 pdgf-receptor pathway p=9.6e-9 log2 cpm low pdgfra∆7 high pdgfra∆7 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 oxidative phosphorylation p=6.4e-4 log2 cpm low pdgfra∆7 high pdgfra∆7 mean 5% confidence interval standard deviation least-squares trend line c figure 4.]
Patterns of gene expression correlated with pdgfrad7, enriched for oxidative phosphorylation, and involving transcription factors like stat1 and nf-jb.

Text 121
10.15252/msb.20166969
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 5. dose–response analysis of an egfr-amplified case. enriched gene sets (webgestalt, david, adj. p-value < 0.05) correlated to egfr. distributions of in-pathway genes in individual cells, sorted from low egfr to high egfr (top panel). an interaction network (generated via genemania) of physical and genetic interactions of transcription factors, whose recognition motifs are overrepresented (opossum, z-score ≥ 10, fisher score ≥ 7) in correlated genes. physical interactions are interactions between the protein product, identified from proteomics experiments. genetic interactions are changes in gene expression that occur when another gene is suppressed in a knockdown experiment.']. Reference sentences:[additionally sox2 [a pluripotency factor highly expressed in embryonic neural and glioma stem cells (suva` et al 2014)] and c-jun [an anti-apoptotic factor involved in glioma-genesis (yoon et al 2012)] targets correlated to egfr dose (fig 5).in particular intra-tumor receptor heterogeneity is a confounder for tyrosine-kinase inhibitor therapy jun hnf1a stat1 nfatc3 pbx1 sox2 egfr hlf genetic interaction physical interaction -2 0 2 4 6 8 trail pathway p=2.8e-15 log2 cpm -2 0 2 4 6 8 10 cell cycle p=4.5e-8 log2 cpm -2 0 2 4 6 8 10 cell motion p=3.1e-2 log2 cpm -2 0 2 4 6 8 10 chromatin modification p=1.4e-2 log2 cpm low egfr high egfr low egfr high egfr low egfr high egfr low egfr high egfr mean 5% confidence interval standard deviation least-squares trend line figure 5.]
Summary: Correlated gene sets related to EGFR levels in individual cells, including transcription factors and pathway genes.

Text 122
10.1126/sciimmunol.aai7793
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 1. an nk/t cell, eomes-associated gene signature was detected in whole blood of teplizumab r patients. (a and b) bar plots of the overlap between module 559 (a) or eomes.mod (b) and the 400 top c-peptide–correlated or randomly ordered genes. dashed line, fdr = 0.05. (c) blue line, enrichment score for overrepresentation of eomes.mod genes in a list of all genes ranked by expression in r samples versus c samples; solid vertical black lines, positions of eomes.mod genes in the ranked list; dashed vertical line, median number of genes. (d) differential gene expression for r patients versus c patients. blue dots, selected nk/cd8 t cell genes; gray dots, all other genes. horizontal dashed line, fdr = 0.05; vertical dashed line, log2(fold change) = 0. (e) eomes gene expression versus auc. the p value was calculated using independent permutation analysis of samples from each visit. (f) eomes expression versus auc, colored by ebv reactivation. rpm, reads per million. (g) overlap of auc-correlated genes (n = 300; table s2) with the top 300 eomesassociated genes. the right y axis shows c-peptide auc levels (means ± sd). (h) left: a protein-protein interaction network of the 300 genes most highly correlated with eomes expression. right: expanded view of the boxed area.']. Reference sentences:[a plot from one representative set size is shown in fig 1a.when an equivalent set size of genes arranged in random order was used (fig 1a) none of the modules showed significant overlap.the most significant overlap was seen with a module of genes associated with the transcription factor eomes (eomes.mod; fig 1b) and with other gene modules (n = 12) that shared significant numbers of genes (fig s3) with eomes.mod (all showed >~5% overlap hypergeometric p ≤ 1.5 × 10−7).moreover none of the modules showed coherent and significant overlap with randomly ranked genes (fig s3 and fig 1b).because eomes and eomes-associated genes consistently scored near the top in many different analyses in our b a 0 2 4 6 auc-correlated random gene order module 559 nk/t cell genes eomes.mod eomes-correlated genes 0 2 4 6 auc-correlated random gene order enrichment –log10(fdr) fdr = 0.045 0.4 0.0 0.4 0 10000 20000 30000 gene rank responder (r) versus control (c) enrichment score (es) up in r up in c c eomes gzmk cd160 kir2ds4 gzmm gzma 0 1 2 3 –2 –1 0 1 2 log2(fold change) –log10(fdr) d 0 10 20 30 40 50 0 6 12 24 0 50 100 150 visit (month) enrichment –log10(fdr) auc % baseline auc % baseline status eomes module enrichment g e enrichment –log10(fdr) 0 50 100 150 200 5 6 7 eomes log2(rpm+1) auc % baseline visit 6 12 24 status c nr r 0 50 100 150 200 5 6 7 eomes log2(rpm+1) auc % baseline ebv no yes visit 6 12 24 c nr r r = 0.39 p value < 1e–3 f extl2 cd226 tigit chst12 spn chpf nkg7 cd7 b3gat1 klrb1 pacsin1 tox gzmb klrd1 eomes cxcr3 ccl5 faslg tbx21 klrg1 s1pr5 il12rb1 foxd2 ifng stat4 nfatc2 cxcr6 prf1 cblb ccl4 hopx pik3r3 scd5 slc20a1 cd247 sla2 runx3 ncr3 pyhin1 gzma procr f2r gpr68 xcl2 colq kif21a dync1h1 ckap5 kifap3 capn5 wdr67 rnf43 optn tes mapre2 sec24c manf ap2b1 tmed10 creld2 fkbp11 sdf2l1 hyou1 ncald extl2 cd226 tigit chst12 spn chpf llgl1 arhgap10 prkch sema4c aldh1b1 vangl1 dlg3 myo6 trpv2 llgl2 nkg7 cd7 styk1 b3gat1 klrb1 toxpacsin1 gzmb klrd1 eomes cxcr3 ccl5 faslg tbx21 klrg1 s1pr5 il12rb1 foxd2 ifng stat4 cxcr6 prf1nfatc2 cblb matk ccl4 hopx pip4k2a msmo1 lss tmem97 skap1 c14orf1 ptgdr crot ebf4 srprb sun2 axin1 dstn rhoc abcb1 hoxb4 fen1 rhof arhgef12 ptch1 h2afx ung syne2 mta2 zfpm1 dclre1a cmklr1 apobec3g stk39 ctbp1 dlg5 npc1 rgs9 ccnd2 calm1 pcna adrb2 dgkq gipr syt11 fut11 c9orf172 elp6 abca2 atp1a3 dthd1 pik3r3 scd5 slc20a1 zap70 cd247 rassf1 sla2 gngt2 lgr6 elovl6 tp53rk nprl2 cacna2d2 cyb5b rtn4r ppp2r2b prkacb runx3 ncr3 pyhin1 gzma procr f2r gpr68 xcl2 h fig 1.consistent with the microarray analysis we detected increased ex- pression of eomes and several other cd8 t cell/nk cell genes in r samples (fig 1d).by comparing eomes transcript to clinical outcomes we found that levels of eomes transcript were significantly correlated with auc across all samples (fig 1e) most strongly in r samples.we also found that levels of eomes transcript and auc were significantly correlated with epstein-barr virus (ebv) reactiva- tion indicating that failure to control ebv is associated with increased expression of eomes (fig 1f).the kinetics of the eomes-associated gene up-regulation was examined by detecting their enrichment in auc-correlated genes at each individual timed visit (fig 1g).changes in expression of eomes-associated genes paralleled the changes in c-peptide levels observed clinically (fig 1g).the re- sulting network graph (fig 1h) showed that eomes-associated genes comprised a highly interconnected set of proteins and were highly enriched in genes having known interactions (fdr < 2 × 10−16).also we did not detect the eomes signature before therapy (fig 1).]
Patterns related to correlation between eomes expression and other genes, clinical outcomes, and EBV reactivation were observed in single-cell data.

Text 123
10.1016/j.cell.2016.11.048
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 5. a large-scale perturb-seq experiment interrogating er homeostasis (a) clustering of genes from upr perturb-seq experiment. heatmap displays correlations between hierarchically clustered average expression profiles from all cells bearing sgrnas targeting the same gene (identified by gbcs). functional annotations are indicated. (b) change in cell-cycle composition induced by indicated genetic perturbations (identified by gbc) relative to control (negctrl-2) cells.']. Reference sentences:[genes −120% −60% 0% 60% 120% cell cycle changes m m-g1 sg1-s g2-m trafficking coatamer complex srp-mediated protein targeting triple t complex translation initiation aminoacyl trna synthetase mitochondrial genes trafficking complex ufmylation a b c d oligosaccharyltransferase complex erad e3 ligase nonessential translocon essential translocon mitochondrial genes figure 5.hierarchical clustering of profiles revealed gene clusters (boxes on the diagonal in figure 5a) consistent with known functional and physical inter- actions including those composed of genes involved in srp- mediated protein targeting (srp68/srp72 and srprb/srpr) ufmylation (ufl1/ufm1/ddrgk1) the ubiquitylation reactions of erad (syvn1/sel1l) and protein trafficking (tmed2/ tmed10) (figure 5a).for example decomposing the populations by cell-cycle position revealed that perturbation of many amino- acyl trna synthetases elicited an accumulation of cells in g2 (figure 5b).clustering of guides and perturbations in figure 5 we first split our large upr perturb-seq population into subpopulations based on guide identity and created average expression profiles (see ‘‘average expression profiles’’ section) of all genes with mean representation > 1 umi per cell.we clustered these profiles using the same criteria and optimally ordered the resulting dendrogram and correlation matrix (as described in ‘‘hierarchical clustering of genes’’) to produce figure 5a.assessing knockdown homogeneity in figure 5 most guide targets were too low abundance to interrogate directly at single-cell resolution.we calculated mean knockdown per guide (figure 5c) and assigned 95% confidence intervals to our estimates via bootstrapping.these scores generally assigned most or all of the perturbed cells outlier status except in guides where very few genes were per- turbed to begin with (bottom panel of figure 5d).we also reported the number of differentially expressed genes measured above in the bottom panel of figure 5d.scoring branch activation in figure 5d as outlined in the main text we adopted a data-driven strategy to score activation of each of the upr branches using the upr epistasis experiment as training data.the branch scores for the upr perturb-seq experiment seen in figure 5d are thus the result of applying the random forest regres- sor scoring system to each cell in the upr perturb-seq experiment and then averaging the results within all cells knocked down for the same gene.branch activation scores in figure 6c were assigned as described above in the ‘‘scoring branch activation in figure 5d’’ section.branch activation scores in figures 7a 7b and s7a were assigned as described above in the ‘‘scoring branch activation in figure 5d’’ section.perturb-seq screen performance related to figure 5 (a) similarity of phenotypes between sgrnas targeting the same gene.for comparison with figure 5d.upre signal data are repeated from figure 5d.to crossvalidate branch activation scores three alternative scoring systems were prototyped in the upr epistasis experiment of figure 3 where branch activation can be inferred from perturbation identity (i.e. each gbc for a given treatment): (1) group score based on expression of defined gene lists (2) ica score seen in figure s5e (3) random forest score seen in figure 5d.the heatmap shows the average normalized expression of the given gene (column) within a particular perturbation subpopulation (row shown in the same order as figure 5a).]
Summary: Correlation patterns in gene expression profiles related to perturbations targeting the same gene and cell cycle changes induced by genetic perturbations.

Text 124
10.1016/j.cell.2016.11.048
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure s6. functionally clustering genes using single-cell correlation information, related to figure 6 (a) full-size version of figure 6h. 200 genes were identified that were induced broadly in the upr perturb-seq experiment and then clustered based on coexpression (star methods). the heatmap shows the average normalized expression of the given gene (column) within a particular perturbation subpopulation (row, shown in the same order as figure 5a). analogous data from the upr epistasis experiment is shown in the bottom panel for comparison, to allow uprdependent genes to be identified. group labels were added based on presumed biological function. (b) full-size version of figure 6i. we identified upr-regulated genes (from figure 3f) that showed the same pattern of induction or repression in response to the perturbations in the upr perturb-seq experiment (removing any whose expression was not substantially altered). these genes were then clustered based on coexpression from the upr epistasis experiment, the upr perturb-seq experiment, or control cells (from the upr perturb-seq experiment bearing the negctrl-2 guide). the heatmap shown is the average normalized expression of those genes in the indicated conditions from the upr epistasis experiment, to assess branch specificity. the colors on the dendrograms identify how these major groups shift when the different cell populations are used for clustering. 3.0 1.5 0.0 −1.5 −3.0 b ire1α↑ atf6↑ 2 1 0 −1 −2 a']. Reference sentences:[]
Summary: Correlation-based clustering of genes in response to perturbations, identifying coexpression patterns across different conditions in single cells.

Text 125
10.1016/j.cell.2016.11.048
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 6. single-cell information reveals a bifurcated upr within a population and allows unbiased discovery of upr-controlled genes (a) single-cell projections (t-sne) of sgrna identity, cell-cycle position, and umi count per cell in hspa5-perturbed and control cells (containing the negctrl-3 guide). we note that the hspa5-targeting sgrnas are offset by only 1 nt (table s1). (b) lrica analysis of hspa5-perturbed cells identifies two subpopulation-defining independent components. left panels: ic values. right panel: subpopulations defined by thresholding ic1. (c) branch-activation scores in hspa5-perturbed cells. (d) normalized expression of upr genes in hspa5-perturbed cells. each row is a cell, ordered by increasing ic1, and each column is a gene in the same order as in figure 3f. (e) mean expression of hspa5 across subpopulations. error bars are 95% ci. (f) cell-cycle composition of hspa5-perturbed cells. (g) strategy for using correlated expression to identify functionally related genes. (h) unbiased identification of induced gene-expression programs. top: normalized expression of 200 genes with significantly altered expression in upr perturbseq experiment clustered based on co-expression. bottom: normalized expression in upr epistasis experiment to assess upr dependence. full version in figure s6a. (i) upr-responsive genes with altered expression in the upr perturb-seq experiment clustered by co-expression in the upr epistasis experiment, the upr perturb-seq experiment, and control cells. cophenetic correlation coefficients between dendrograms along with a visual guide (represented by colors) to the movement of major groups included. full version in figure s6b. (j) strategy for enriching cells perturbed for a trait of interest. (k) within cells enriched for a set of bait cholesterol biosynthesis genes, a group of genes clustered with the bait genes and had more correlated expression than in control cells. right panel shows reactome annotations and srebp binding data for the identified genes (black, yes; gray, no). see also figure s6.']. Reference sentences:[when compared to unperturbed cells cells transduced with hspa5-targeting sgrnas were distinguishable as a distinct population (figure 6a) and had markedly different patterns of gene expression (=2100 genes differentially expressed at p < 0.01; star methods).two of these (ic1 and ic2) varied substantially between control and hspa5-perturbed cells (figure 6b) and were strongly inﬂu- enced by upr-responsive genes.comparing these hypothe- sis-free results to the branch activation scores (figure 6c) showed that our analysis pipeline had independently discov- ered a subpopulation structure with differential activation of the upr branches within hspa5-perturbed cells.indeed when we ordered the cells by the value of ic1 and examined the expression of upr-induced genes (as defined in fig- ure 3f) the trends defining these subpopulations were apparent (figure 6d).these differences did not reﬂect levels of bip depletion as the subpopulations with ic1 low and high (figures 6b and 6d) had equal expression of hspa5 (figure 6e).gene-gene covariance analysis of perturb-seq data reveals transcriptional regulons figure 6d underscores a key point: correlated up- or downre- gulation of genes can be a signature of shared regulation.1876 cell 167 1867–1882 december 15 2016 ire1α↓ perk↓ perk↑ ire1α↑ atf6↑ upr epistasis control cells upr perturb-seq 0.13 0.81 specific genes random genes expression of cholesterol genes control correlation matrix enriched correlation matrix population fraction perrturbation expression in upr perturb-seq experiment expression in upr epistasis experiment ire1α↑ cholesterol biosynthesis n-glycosylation/ golgi trafficking ribosomal proteins atf6↑ perk↑ insig1 hmgcs1 sqle fdft1 idi1 tmem97 acat2 fdps c14orf1 tm7sf2 dhcr7 mvd chi3l2 apoc1 rp11-660l16.2 lss scd dhcr24 hsd17b7 ebp mvk msmo1 hmgcr reactome cholesterol synthesis encode srebp binding −10 0 10 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 control perturb-seq enriched ρ > 0 ρ ~ 0 ρ < 0 gene of interest perturbations other genes … −0.8 −0.4 0.0 0.4 0.8 1.2 1.6 2.0 2.4 g1-s g2-m m m-g1 s −0.6 0.0 0.6 1.2 1.8 2.4 3.0 3.6 4.2 sgcontrol sghspa5-1 sghspa5-2 3000 9000 15000 21000 27000 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 sgcontrol sghspa5 ic1 low sghspa5 ic1 high guide identity cell cycle phase ic1 perk score ire1α score atf6 score ic2 subpopulations umi count −8 −4 0 4 8 order cells by increasing ic1 normalized expression of upr genes perk↓ ic1 high ic1 low perk↑ ire1α ↑ atf6↑ hspa5 control sghspa5 ic1 low sghspa5 ic1 high 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 population fraction m m-g1 sg1-s g2-m control sghspa5 ic1 high sghspa5 ic1 low 0 2 4 6 hspa5 (umi) g j h i k a b c d e f enrich … figure 6.cell 167 1867–1882 december 15 2016 1877 perturbations elicit coordinated changes we reasoned that perturb-seq could help identify related genes (figure 6g) (klein et al. 2015).our initial analysis (figure 6h) identified 5 cholesterol biosynthesis genes with correlated expression.when we confined our gene clus- tering analysis to the =9000 cells most perturbed for these genes we saw strengthened correlations and the emergence of a larger cluster of cholesterol biosynthesis genes grouping together (figure 6k).single-cell analysis in figure 6 we formed a population of cells containing either of two guides targeting hspa5 or the negctrl-3 guide.branch activation scores in figure 6c were assigned as described above in the ‘‘scoring branch activation in figure 5d’’ section.two ics varied substantially in average value between the control and perturbed cells (figure 6b).the first ic1 had a two-phase dis- tribution in which all control cells and the majority of hspa5-perturbed cells fell in the large lower peak and a subpopulation of hspa5- perturbed cells fell into a long tail of higher values (figure 6b).we defined the sghspa5 ic1 high cells to be the ones that fell within this tail (figure 6b).figure 6d shows the normalized expression of genes found in our epistasis analysis (figure 3f) as columns and the hspa5-perturbed cells as rows ordered by increasing ic1.figure 6e was created by averaging the expression of hspa5 within the subpopulations defined in figure 6b.figure 6f was created using the cell cycle positions called in the ‘‘cell cycle position’’ section.gene clustering analysis in figure 6h we first needed an unbiased approach to find programs of gene expression induced in the upr perturb-seq experiment.we also assigned identities to some other clusters based on clear func- tional connections (as seen in figure 6h).comparison of clustering of upr genes in figure 6i as many upr genes fell out of the previous analysis we wanted to evaluate the ability to go the opposite direction and cluster known interactions.enrichment of cholesterol genes in figure 6k our unbiased analysis in figure 6h contained a cluster of genes involved in cholesterol biosynthesis: acat2 fdps fads1 insig1 tmem97.to demonstrate the improvement in correlation obtained by this ‘‘fishing’’ approach we compared correlation matrices composed of these 23 genes and 23 random genes of similar average abundance between our enriched pop- ulation and control cells (seen in figure 6k).functionally clustering genes using single-cell correlation information related to figure 6 (a) full-size version of figure 6h.(b) full-size version of figure 6i.]
Correlated gene expression patterns in single cells perturbed for upr, revealing subpopulations with differential upr activation and functionally related gene clusters.

Text 126
10.1016/j.cell.2016.11.038
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 3. the role of 24 tfs in bmdcs stimulated with lps (a) tf modules. pearson correlation (color bar) between the regulatory coefficients of each pair of guides (rows, columns) in a model without cellstate covariates. yellow rectangles, tf modules. leftmost column, on-target effect. (b) agreement between guides targeting the same gene. distribution of correlations between guides targeting the same gene (gray) or different genes (blue). (c) cell states. enrichment (-log10(q value)) of']. Reference sentences:[we cultured precursors from the bone marrow of cas9 trans- genic micein gm-csf (platt etal. 2014)and after 2 days infected c d a b go terms effect of guide on its target expression effect of guide on its target expression guides guides probability pearson correlation of β between guides –1.0 –0.5 0.0 0.00 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20 0.30 0.25 f probability 0.00 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20 0.30 0.25 0.5 1.0 pearson correlation of β between guides pearson correlation of β between guides –0.6 –0.4 –0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 within gene across genes within gene across genes before modeling cell states cell states cell state enrichment or depletion −5.0 −2.5 0.0 2.5 5.0 −3.0 −1.5 0.0 1.5 3.0 e after modeling cell states −0.8 0.0 0.8 pearson correlation of β between guides −0.8 0.0 0.8 runx1 ctcf nfkb1 stat1 ahr irf1 irf4 spi1 irf2 rel stat2 hif1a cebpb rela ets2 junb atf3 2 5 6 0 4 1 3 2 5 6 0 4 1 3 nfkb1 runx1 irf4 spi1 cebpb rela hif1a stat3 junb stat1 2 rel stat1 stat2 nfkb1 rel rela ctcf runx1 irf4 irf2 irf1 egr2 ribosome cytokine secretion mitotic nuclear division mhc class i mhc class ii complex lps response rage receptor binding nfkb signaling apoptotic cell clearence extracellular region t cell differentiation response to oxidative stress mitochondrion signed –log10 (q-value) signed –log10 (q-value) p < 10–15 p < 10–9 perturbation of figure 3.a simple model (without cell states) for stimulated bmdcs (figures 3 and 4; table s3; star methods) performed well by two basic measures: guides tar- geting the same gene had a similar impact (figure 4a) with correlated regulatory coefficients profiles (figure 3b p < 10=9 wilcoxon signed-rank test) and guides typically repressed their direct target (figure 3a left column).to test this we identified seven cell clusters in 1310 wild-type lps-stimu- lated cells (figure 3c).testing the association of each guide or targeted gene with each state (figure 3d) cells perturbed for m2 tfs (cebpb rela junb) are enriched in clusters matching p2 and depleted in clusters matching p5 whereas those perturbed for m4 tfs (spi1 irf4 nfkb1 runx1) have the opposite effect (figure 3d).enrichment (red) or depletion (blue) of single pair and triplets of guides (rows) in cells in each state (as in figure 3c).as in figure 3a for models either without (a) or with (b) cell-state covariates.as in figure 3d for tfs (rows) in each state (shown in figure s6g).analysis of the role of 24 tfs in bmdcs related to figure 3 (a) cell states in bmdcs pre-stimulation.shown is the significance (-log10(p-value) of the hypergeometric test) of the overlap between the expressed genes in each of the programs p1-p5 (as in figure 4a) and the genes induced in each of the seven cell states of genetically unperturbed dcs at 3h post- lps (as in figure 3c).]
Patterns related to correlation between guides targeting the same gene and cell state enrichment in stimulated single cells.

Text 127
10.1016/j.cell.2016.11.038
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 2. mimosca: a scalable model for perturb-seq (a) model relates a continuous phenotype (arrow) to a covariate (here, guide identity). (b–d) accounting for differences in cell quality and state. scatterplots show for every cell (dot) the relation between the expression of ccl17 (y axis) or its residual after a model is fit and the number of transcripts in the cell (x axis; log [total transcripts detected]), in the original data (b), after including quality measures as covariates (c) and after also including cell-state proportions (d). (e) cell states. cells are in either of two states (red, blue) and perturbation by sgrna1 increases the proportion of cells in one over the other. (f and g) accounting for cell states. effect on ccl17 expression (y axis) in cells with (+) and without (à) sgrela-3, in the original model (f) and when including cellstate proportions (g). boxplots denote three quartiles, distribution with whiskers, and outliers as dots. table: high ccl17 expression in cell-state 6, whose proportion changes most due to sgrela-3. (h) distinction of cells affected or unaffected by a perturbation. left: distribution of number of cells with sgstat1-3 that have a given fit (x axis) to the model of the effect of this perturbation. right: distribution of percentage of cells confidently perturbed by each guide. (i) contribution of each model component (y axis) to the % variance explained (x axis) by r2 values from cross-validation. error bars indicate 95% confidence interval. +adjust: distinguishing which cells are effectively perturbed; +transcripts: including quality covariates; +cell states: including state co-variates. (j) correlation matrix between genes in the residuals of the model. see also figure s2.']. Reference sentences:[we revisit each cell and evaluate the extent to which its profile was consistent with the assigned perturbation (figure 2h left).based on the estimated fit over 66% of cells are affected by their delivered perturbation on average (figure 2h right).cell states explain a significant proportion of observed variation (figure 2d) and some of the sgrnas’ effects are accounted for (figure 2f versus 2g) sug- gesting that those perturbations may have primarily affected subtype proportions.for stimulated bmdcs the perturbations explain 5% of the variance 17% is explained when adding cell quality covariates and up to 20% with added cell-state covariates (figure 2i).gene-gene correlations in the residuals were also significantly reduced as we added a h j i b f g no covariates perturbation effect + cell states log2(ccl17 umis) β|yx x|yβ + number of transcripts detected + cell states residuals of ccl17 expression residuals of ccl17 expression transcripts detected per cell transcripts detected per cell transcripts detected per cell + – + – –6 –50 –40 –30 –20 –10 0 10 20 30 6 4 2 0 –4 –2 model fit of ccl17 expression model fit of ccl17 expression –6 6 4 2 0 –4 –2 number of cells with sgstat1-3 δ sum-squared error with and without considering the sgstat1-3 coefficient 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 continuous phenotype y • gene expression • gene signature • pc scores • cell size sg1 = sgrna1 c = sgrnacontrol = cell state1 = cell state2 sgrna1 y cell state1 cell state2 sg1 sg1 sg1 c c c c c c c c sg1 sg1 sg1 sg1 sgrela-3 sgrela-3 variance explained (%) +transcripts + cell states –0.3 0.3 0.0 genes genes 0 5 10 15 20 guides + adjust + transcripts + cell states c e d cell state sgrela-3 (+) shift pearson correlation between residuals top 1000 variable genes ccl17 differential expression –log10(q-value) 6 12.2 +115% without cell states including cell states 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 confidently perturbed percentage (%) log transformed data figure 2.1856 cell 167 1853–1866 december 15 2016 covariates (figure 2j).our inference frame- work (figure 2) and future improvements can help deconvolve mixtures of knockouts and is potentially scalable to higher order interactions.this analysis is relevant for figure 2j.performance of mimosca framework related to figure 2 (a–c) contribution of each component in the model (y axis) to the % variance explained (x axis) based on the r2 values from cross-validation in each of three screens (labeled on top).]
Patterns related to correlation between gene expressions in single cells, affected by perturbations and cell states, are shown in the figure.

Text 128
10.1016/j.cell.2016.11.038
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure s5. a pooled cloning strategy for perturb-seq, related to figure 6 (a) overview. pooled cloning can be performed by oligo nucleotide synthesis of an array of sgrna (top) followed by a two-stage cloning protocol (bottom) to insert the library, sequence with next generation sequencing, and to insert the intervening sequence. (b) application in k562 cells. left: pearson correlation (color bar) between the regulatory coefficients of each pair of guides (rows, columns) in a set targeting seven chromatin regulators in a model without cell state covariates (leftmost column: on-target effect). right: correlation in the effects between guides targeting the same gene (left, light gray) and different genes (right, dark gray). boxplots denote three quartiles, distribution with whiskers, and outliers as dots.']. Reference sentences:[]
Summary: Correlation patterns between regulatory coefficients of sgRNAs targeting chromatin regulators in K562 cells, showing on-target effects and effects on different genes.

Text 129
10.1016/j.cell.2016.11.038
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 6. perturb-seq of non-essential tfs and cell-cycle regulators in k562 cells (a–e) perturbation of tfs. (a and b) modules. as in figure 3a, for models either without (a) or with (b) cell-state covariates. (c) tfs effects on cell-state proportions. as in figure 3d, for tfs (rows) in each state (shown in figure s6g). (d and e) agreement of guide effects across time points. distribution of correlations between guides targeting the same gene (gray), different genes (blue), and a gene and an intergenic region (red) within and across time points (t1 = 7 days, t2 = 14 days), in either a model that does not (d) or does (e) include cell-state covariates. (f) perturbation of cell-cycle regulators. the effect (color bar, average regulatory coefficients) of guides targeting each gene (rows) on cell-cycle phase signatures (columns). see also figures s5 and s6 and tables s4 and s5.']. Reference sentences:[fitting a linear model without cell-state covariates the tfs partition into two modules (figure 6a).we defined nine cell states by clustering of wt cells (fig- ure s6g) and found specific perturbations enriched in individual states (figure 6c) consistent with known functions of the perturbed genes.in the resulting model (figure 6b) individual guides to the same gene are more consistent in their effects especially across ex- periments and durations (figure 6e) suggesting that tf-specific effects are reproducible even if cell-state proportions change over time.furthermore supervised analysis using signature gene sets for cell-cycle phases (macosko et al. 2015) showed that perturbations of aurka and tor1aip1 (both decrease fitness) are associated with an increase in g2/m and m signatures (figure 6f).perturbation of cabp7 (increases fitness) has an opposite effect: decrease in g2/m and m signa- tures and increase in the m/g1 signature (figure 6f).cell 167 1853–1866 december 15 2016 1861 of cit increases g1/s and s states a different cell-cycle route manifested as increased fitness (figure 6f).a b yy1 yy1 gabpa gabpa elf1 elf1 elf1 elf1 creb1 creb1 elk1 elk1 elk1 elk1 egr1 egr1 egr1 irf1 irf1 creb1 yy1 elk1 elk1 elk1 elk1 egr1 egr1 egr1 irf1 irf1 creb1 creb1 elf1 elf1 elf1 elf1 gabpa gabpa yy1 creb1 c cenpe intergenic cabp7 ect2 aurkb aurkc aurka tor1aip1 ptger2 arhgef17 cit racgap1 cep55 ogg1 f g1/s s g2/m m m/g1 apoptosis d e within gene across genes intergenic within t1 within t2 between t1 and t2 within t1 within t2 between t1 and t2 pearson correlation of β pearson correlation of β with pca yy1 egr1 elk1 e2f4 elf1 gabpa irf1 creb1 intergenic –0.2 –0.4 –0.6 0.2 0.0 0.4 0.6 0.0 –0.2 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 –3.0 0.0 3.0 –0.01 0.00 0.01 without modeling cell states after modeling cell states before modeling cell states after modeling cell states cell states effect of guide on its target expression guides pearson correlation of β between guides −0.8 0.0 0.8 cell cycle states effect of guide on its target expression guides pearson correlation of β between guides mean β −0.8 0.0 0.8 1 2 4 5 6 3 0 7 8 –log10 (q-value) perturbation of perturbation of figure 6.a pooled cloning strategy for perturb-seq related to figure 6 (a) overview.additional analysis of the role tfs and cell-cycle regulators in k562 cells related to figure 6 (a) fitness effects of tf perturbations in k562 cells.]
Patterns of correlation between guide effects targeting the same gene, different genes, and intergenic regions across time points in single-cell transcriptomics.

Text 130
10.1016/j.cell.2016.11.038
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 7. prospects for perturb-seq (a and b) saturation analysis. effect of the number of cells (y axis) and transcripts (x axis) on recovery as measured by correlation (color bar) with either the per gene (a) or cell-state signature (b) effects observed in the full data for bmdcs at 3 hr. the number of cells per perturbation (1.0) is a mean of 300 and a median of 155 and the number of transcripts per cell (1.0) is a median of 5,074. (c) tradespace of number of cells (x axis) and measurements per cell (y axis) required for scaling perturb-seq. (d) future extensions, by scaling the number of cells (left) or incorporating other cell covariates (right), such as lineage (tree), marker expression (binned distribution), or time course information (timer), and a more generalized modeling of the relationship between x and y (y = f(x)).']. Reference sentences:[current and future scale of perturb-seq at its current scale perturb-seq can be readily applied for tar- geted screens of a subset of genes of interest and their interac- tions (figure 7c) as we have done here.perturb-seq will scale as both the cost of sequencing and of scrna-seq decreases (figure 7c).our analysis suggests that a broad survey of transcriptional phenotypes across thou- sands of perturbations can be performed with a few tens of cells per perturbation (figure 7b).0 1 2 7 3 5 0 1 0 a d c expression matrix cell metadata covariates gene level regulation state level regulation pearson correlation of β 5 6 7 genome-wide library 100000 perturbations 2 3 4 5 6 figure 7.expressed barcodes can also be used to mark cells derived from a common ancestor for the purposes of lineage tracing (figure 7d).saturation analysis for differential expression related to figure 7 (a) theoretical probability (pk) of having a successful perturbation in every target (y axis) as a function of the number of perturbations k (x axis) assuming in- dependence at different probability of detection (colors).]
Patterns related to correlation between gene expression and cell-state signature effects in perturb-seq scaling and future extensions.

Text 131
10.1038/srep39921
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 2. the effect of sequencing depth and cell number on single cell umi estimates. sequencing reads from all the high quality single cells collected for na19239 were subsampled to the indicated sequencing depth and cell number, and subsequently converted to molecules using the umis. each point represents the mean +/−sem of 10 random draws of the indicated cell number. the left panel displays the results for 6,097 (50% of detected) genes with lower expression levels and the right panel the results for 6,097 genes with higher expression levels. (a) pearson correlation of aggregated gene expression level estimates from single cells compared to the bulk sequencing samples. (b) total number of genes detected with at least one molecule in at least one of the single cells. (c) pearson correlation of cell-to-cell gene expression variance estimates from subsets of single cells compared to the full single cell data set.']. Reference sentences:[]
Summary: Correlation of gene expression levels and variance estimates in single cells compared to bulk sequencing samples and full single cell dataset.

Text 132
10.1186/s12864-016-3445-0
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 3 samhd1 knockout gene expression (a) heatmap of the difference between knockout and wild-type expression over time, broken down by culture condition. block colours and numbers in parentheses share the same meaning as in the fig 2 heatmaps. b globally significant msigdb signatures correlating with knockout sod1 expression. c the expression of sod1 and its top co-expressors after eight hours across all cell clusters. red, blue and green lines correspond to clusters one, two and three respectively. widths indicate expression level']. Reference sentences:[the most striking feature of the globally sig- nificant knockout effects was that they were predomin- antly microenvironment specific (fig 3a).not only does this point to a qualitative difference in expression but 一 as can be seen from the barely detectable expression changes in standard media (fig 3a) 一 the magnitude of the difference is much greater in conditioned media.genes cor- relating with it) in knockouts versus wild-types (fig 3c).fig 3b lists the globally significant signa- tures from msigdb v5.1 [23] consisting of gene sets more correlated with sod1 in knockout versus wild- type cells.with these pathway associations validating this approach by supporting known biology of increased inflammation with samhd1 knockout - albeit within the context of oxidative stress and altered proteostasis - we asked if other pathways in fig 3b point to unex- pected biological themes.however the pathways in fig 3b counter-intuitively point to p53 dependent and independent g1 arrest as part of the dna damage response.]
Summary: Correlation patterns between gene expressions in knockout and wild-type cells, with microenvironment-specific effects and pathway associations.

Text 133
10.1371/journal.pbio.1002585
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 9. exploration of potential cofounding factors. (a) correlation of the ctcf gene with the rest of the 91 genes, at all six time-points. (b) facs analysis of the cell cycle repartition at 0 and 8 h of differentiation. the difference between the two distributions was found not to be statistically significant (p = 0.18 using a wilcoxon test). (c and d): calculation of the entropy content per cluster of cells re-organized using either wanderlust (c) or tscan algorithm (d). (e and f) in silico comparison of the effect of a synchronous versus an asynchronous differentiation process on the evolution of entropy. data for this figure (c to f) can be found at osf.io/k2q5b.']. Reference sentences:[almost no correlation was detected between this gene and any of the 91 other genes (fig 9a) demonstrating that our gene list contained virtually no other cell-cyle- regulated gene.no significant difference in cell cycle repartition could be seen at 8 h of differentiation (fig 9b).nevertheless the entropy of sub-populations of cells grouped according to either their wanderlust pseu- dotimes or tscan clusters showed the same rise-then-fall profile as with the original single cell data (fig 9c and 9d).in the synchronous case we obtained a variation in entropy resembling the one we calculated from the data (fig 9e).the introduction of asynchrony induced a flatter time pro- file of the entropy (fig 9f).differentiation analyzed at single cell level plos biology | doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.1002585 december 27 2016 15 / 35 fig 9.as expected [32] mean cell size started to decrease during differentiation to reach a mini- mum by 72 h (fig 9b).]
Summary: Lack of correlation between ctcf gene and other genes, insignificant cell cycle differences at 8h, consistent entropy patterns with different clustering methods, synchronous differentiation leads to entropy variation, asynchrony leads to flatter entropy profile.

Text 134
10.1371/journal.pbio.1002585
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 5. gene expression correlations. (a) shown is the number of significant correlations, between any pair of genes, surviving 10,000 subsampling iterations, per time-point; (b) correlation variations between two consecutive time-points using the color code bar shown at the bottom right of the panels. cold colors (blue and green) indicate decreasing genes correlations and hot colors (from yellow to red) stand for increasing gene correlations between the time-points considered. intermediary variations (between −0.4 and +0.4) as displayed in black. the bottom left red barplot indicates the number of increasing correlations, whereas the green barplot shows the number of decreasing correlations between each pair of consecutive time-points; (c) the three genes that displayed the highest number of edges at each time-point were listed in the table, as well as the number of edges connecting those genes. data for this figure (a and b) can be found at osf.io/k2q5b.']. Reference sentences:[as shown in (fig 5a) the density of the resulting networks (number of significant correla- tions) was clearly varying along the differentiation process.interestingly this global behavior resulted from both an increase and a decrease in gene-to-gene correlation values (fig 5b).this fast-changing density of the networks was also accompanied by a progressive change in the identity of the most highly correlated nodes (fig 5c).stard4 was both an early driver and one of the genes that displayed the highest number of edges at 0 h (fig 5c).]
Patterns of gene correlation dynamics during differentiation, with varying network density and changing highly correlated genes over time.

Text 135
10.1371/journal.pbio.1002585
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 6. identification of a dynamical network biomarker. shown is the behavior of a subset composed of 12 genes fitting the following criteria: increase in their standard deviation and participation to increasing correlations, between 0h and 8h. for this subset, we plotted the mean coefficent of variation (cv), the mean of the correlation between any pair of genes belonging to the subset (pccin), the mean of the correlation between any one gene of the subset and any one gene outside of the subset (pccout) and the resulting i-scores, at each timepoint. the dnb group included the following genes: acss1, alas1, batf, bpi, cd151, crip2, dcp1a, emb, fhl3, hsp90aa1, lcp1, mtfr1. data for this figure can be found at osf.io/k2q5b.']. Reference sentences:[we therefore first selected a group of 12 genes by a two-stage process: (1) we first selected all of the genes that participated in at least one pair that showed an increased correlation of at least 0.5 between 0 and 8 h and (2) among those genes we selected the genes that showed an increase in their cv value between 0 and 8 h. we then computed the i score of that group of genes at each time-point (fig 6).such a measure provided a distribution of entropy values per gene fig 6.]
Summary: Identification of dynamic correlations among a subset of genes over time, leading to the calculation of i-scores for each timepoint.

Text 136
10.1016/j.celrep.2016.12.060
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 4. experimental validation of the difference between ansc-mid and anscs-late subpopulations by separating anscs based on the level of gfap-gfp expression by facs (a) predicted gfp ﬂuorescence states of anscs from a gfp-high state in which the gfap-gfp promoter is active, to a gfp-low state in which the cells have committed to differentiation but retain some gfp and, finally, to the npc state, in which cells are gfp negative. (b–e) top: gene expression in single cells grouped by molecular subtype as defined in figure 3. gene expression is expressed as log2(fpkm + 1). bottom: gene expression was measured by qrt-pcr in subpopulations of anscs divided by their level of gfap-gfp expression (gfap-gfp-high ansc, gfap-gfp-mid ansc, and gfap-gfp-low ansc) and npcs. expression shown for (b) atp1a2, (c) ntsr2, (d) dlx2, (e) nrxn3. the p values are from a one-sided wilcoxon signedrank test (p % 0.05). (f) correlation between expression of key markers of nscs and neurogenesis in ansc populations divided by gfap-gfp. the carpet plot shows correlation (spearman’s rho) between individual genes in all ansc subpopulations divided by level of gfap-gfp. the color of the box indicates correlation (spearman’s rho) between a given gene pair (scale at top left).']. Reference sentences:[the gfap-gfp transgene is known to be downregulated as nscs commit to the npc state (doetsch et al. 2002; pastrana et al. 2009; figure 4a).consistent with single- cell data anscs with the lowest levels of gfp ﬂuorescence had significantly higher expression of dlx2 and dlx1 (markers of early neurogenesis) (figure 4d; figure s4b) but did not yet express other later makers that were more exclusively ex- pressed in npcs such as nrxn3 and dcx (figure 4e; figure s4c).the subdivision of the ansc population by gfp levels generally recapitulated the gene correlation module as shown in figure 3j; specifically the positive correlation between markers of astro- cytes and mediators of self-renewal and anti-correlation be- tween these genes and early mediators of neurogenesis (dlx1 and dlx2) (figure 4f; figure s4i).the method of cell dissociation and marker choices for facs have been areas of active debate in the field of nsc biology (codega et al. 2014; luo et al. 2015; mich et al. cell reports 18 777–790 january 17 2017 783 a b c d e f figure 4.]
Summary: Correlation patterns between markers of astrocytes, self-renewal, and neurogenesis in ansc subpopulations based on gfap-gfp expression levels.

Text 137
10.1016/j.celrep.2016.12.060
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 7. meta-analysis to compare global pseudotime-dependent gene expression in various single-cell datasets (a) schematic outlining the approaches for generating pseudotime expression heatmaps and for correlating gene rankings by ape (supplemental experimental procedures) for different single-cell datasets. (b) heatmap representing the expression of all detected genes ranked by ape defined in our study. expression is plotted as a function of pseudotime. left: expression from our study (qnscs, anscs, and npcs) and pseudotime defined by monocle ordering using consensus-ordering genes identified by machine learning (table s7). right: expression from the study of llorens-bobadilla et al. (2015) (nscs and taps) and pseudotime defined by monocle ordering using consensus-ordering genes (table s7). (c) heatmap representing expression of the 20 genes with the highest values of ape (expressed most exclusively in npcs) in our dataset. left: expression from our study (qnscs, anscs, and npcs) and pseudotime defined as in (b). right: expression from the study of llorens-bobadilla et al. (2015) (nscs and taps) and pseudotime defined as in (b).']. Reference sentences:[we first ranked all detected genes in our dataset by their average pseudotime of expression (ape) (figure 7a).(2015) revealed that most detected genes show a high similarity in their expression profile (figure 7b).furthermore the genes exclusively expressed in npcs (or taps) are highly conserved between the two datasets (figure 7c).(2015) (figure 7d; spearman’s rho = 0.63).the correlation between the in- dependent ape gene rankings for the cells from our study and the differentiating myoblasts from (trapnell et al. 2014) was still positive but much lower (figure 7e; spearman’s rho = 0.17).(2015) (figure 7f; spearman’s rho = 0.38).our data revealed that 786 cell reports 18 777–790 january 17 2017 figure 7.]
Summary: Correlation patterns of gene expression across different single-cell datasets based on pseudotime.

Text 138
10.1038/nn.4495
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 7 transcriptional responses to energy imbalance. (a) histograms showing the number of genes significantly up- or downregulated in response to fasting and hfd in each arc-me neuron type. (b) comparison of fasting responses of agrp neuron subtypes (top) and pomc neuron subtypes (bottom). genes plotted were significantly affected by fasting (false-discovery rate (fdr) < 0.25 in at least one agrp neuron subtype (top) or pomc neuron subtype (bottom). while subtypes generally show significant correlation (pearson correlation = 0.58, p = 2 × 10−237 for agrp neuron subtypes and pearson correlation = 0.55, p = 2 × 10−47 using student’s t-distribution test for pomc neuron subtypes), there are many individual genes that are differentially affected by fasting (for example, some are in the top left and some in the bottom right quadrant). boldface indicates genes that are also shown in c. (c) examples of genes affected by fasting only in one subtype of agrp neurons and pomc neurons, or affected oppositely between subtypes. for comparison, average log2 fold-change (fc) values are also shown for all arc-me cells, all arc-me neurons and all agrp or pomc neurons. bars are shaded to indicate genes differentially expressed at fdr < 0.25; green and red indicate up- and downregulation, respectively. (d) heat map of gene expression fold-change values for genes significantly affected in at least one agrp or pomc subtype. genes are clustered by gene expression similarities across agrp and pomc subtypes. go terms with highest significance for each cluster are shown.']. Reference sentences:[]
Summary: Correlation patterns in gene expression responses to fasting in different neuron subtypes, with some genes showing subtype-specific effects.

Text 139
10.1073/pnas.1621412114
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 2. a critical transition signature for differentiation branch points. (a) time point-specific boxplots represent the distribution of ic(t) values from 1,000 permutations of 25 randomly selected genes. after bifurcation, we used cells that cluster as m lineage for day 3. the mean value corresponds to the ic(t) value [x(t) = 96 genes × m cells]. p value < 2e-10 for comparison between the time points (kolmogorov–smirnov test and wilcoxon rank sum test). (b) gene to gene (gxg) correlation plots for six lineage-specific transcription factors at day 0 (“in attractor”). the shade corresponds to the pearson’s correlation across all of the cells for each pairwise comparison, whereas the shape of the data cloud shows the distribution of pearson’s correlation across all of the cells for each gene pair. (c and d) gxg correlation plots for six lineage-specific transcription factors during two state transitions. we can observe distinct patterns for individual genes, such as eomes (important during e → ps but not ps → m transition), or small regulatory circuits (i.e., day 2.5 shows anticorrelated networks that are related with lineage segregation). (e) early ipsc to icm differentiation model. each cell state (stable or transitional) can be marked by specific transcription factors.']. Reference sentences:[the counterintuitive increase in overall gene to gene correlation reveals a tight coordination of gene expression before the tran- sition (fig 2 and fig s3) (11).these changes can be summa- rized by the critical transition index ic(t) computed for each measured time point t (fig 2a and fig s3) which is defined as the ratio of the average of all pairs of gene to gene correlation coefficients to the average of all pairs of cell to cell correlation coefficients.computing the ic(t) values (from day 0 to day 3) revealed a significant increase as the differentiating cell pop- ulation approached the m–en branch point indicating a bi- furcation (fig 2a and fig s3).cells were indistinguishable at day 0 (e state) and there was no apparent correlation between pluripotency and lineage-specific transcripts (fig 2b and dataset s1 table s2)— consistent with the theory that in an attractor state cell pop- ulation diversity is mainly caused by symmetric fluctuations around the “set point” caused by gene expression noise (7 19).specifically on destabilization of the e state triggered by the first differentiation signal (activin a) cells diversified and gene to gene correlation between nanog an e state-specific marker and ps state-specific markers increased (fig 2c and dataset s1 table s3).at day 2 when the ps-like cells are still uniform with respect to lineage-specific markers we observed a temporary decrease still significant in the critical transition index (fig 2a) consistent with the ps state being a distinct and observable although transient stabilized state.by day 2.5 the value of ic increased again driven by the emergence of correlations and anticorrelations in the expression of lineage- specific transcription factors (fig 2d and dataset s1 table s4).after cells were committed to a specific lineage cell-state vari- ability (within each new subpopulation) decreased thus lowering ic for each individual day 3 cell subpopulation (fig 2a).combining the above findings with consensus clustering and correlation analysis allowed us to build a comprehensive model of early ipsc to icm differentiation (fig 2e).thus information on prospective fate is hidden in the bulk population distributions fig 2.]
Patterns of gene-gene correlation change during cell state transitions, indicating coordination of gene expression before differentiation.

Text 140
10.1038/ni.3688
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 3 generation and application of ‘early-state’ and ‘fate’ classifiers to predict the identity of cells in intermediate states of differentiation. (a,c) classifier separation of div1mem cells (blue; n = 24 cells) from div1te cells (red; n = 36 cells) (a) and day 7 effector cells (yellow; n = 48 cells) from total memory cells (teal; n = 96 cells), which include tcm cells (n = 48) and tem cells (n = 48) (c) (all cells obtained as in fig 1). (b,d) cross-validated scores of division 1 cd8+ t lymphocytes (b) and day 7 effector and memory cd8+ t lymphocytes (d) on which the early-state classifier (b) and fate classifier (d) were trained; results are presented as kernel density histograms. (e) application of earlystate and fate classifiers to predict the fate of individual day 4 cd8+ t lymphocytes (n = 34); black and purple dashed lines indicate the boundary between predicted memory-like or effector-like day 4 cells. (f) prediction analysis of individual day 4 cd8+ t lymphocytes as assessed in e, presented as the memory-score distribution (from 0 (effector) to 1 (memory)) of the early-state classifier (horizontal axis) versus that of final-fate classifier (vertical axis): dashed black and purple lines, fate classifier’s ‘decision boundary’ between memory cells and day 7 effector cells, and orange line, early-state classifier’s ‘decision boundary’ between div1mem cells and div1te cells (orange shaded area, 95% confidence interval, with the assumption of gaussian error); both sets of lines are ‘stylized estimates’ of the real boundaries, which are complex ‘piecewiselinear functions’ and can be much more furrowed. pearson correlation (linear), r = 0.78 (p = 4.8 × 10−8); spearman correlation (monotonic), r = 0.71 (p = 2.2 × 10−6). each symbol (a,c,e,f) represents an individual cell. data are representative of two experiments.']. Reference sentences:[]
Correlation between early-state and fate classifiers in predicting cell fate, with a Pearson correlation of 0.78 and Spearman correlation of 0.71.

Text 141
10.1038/ni.3688
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 4 identification of putative regulators of the differentiation of cd8+ t lymphocytes. (a) overlap (middle) of genes expressed differentially by div1te cells relative to their expression by div1mem cells (left) and those expressed differentially by terminally differentiated effector t cells (tte cells) relative to their expression by memory t cells (tmem cells) (right) (all cells obtained as in fig 1). (b) plotting of the difference in expression of genes expressed differentially by effector cells versus memory cells (as in a; tte/tmem) against that of genes expressed differentially by div1te cells versus div1mem cells (div1te/div1mem). pearson correlation, r = 0.78 (p = 3.6 × 10−13). each symbol represents an individual gene. (c) differential expression of 89 common genes (one per row) by all cd8+ t lymphocyte populations of naive cells (gray), div1te cells (red), div1mem cells (blue), day 4 cells (orange), day 7 cells (yellow), tcm cells (green) and tem cells (purple) (one cell per column); left margin (brackets), hierarchical clustering. (d) temporal expression patterns of selected genes across inferred paths of differentiation for effector cells (orange), tcm cells (purple) and tem cells (green); shaded areas, 95% confidence interval (bootstrapped from all possible single-cell expression trajectories). data are representative of two experiments.']. Reference sentences:[]
Summary: Correlation between gene expressions in different cell types, including effector and memory cells, in CD8+ T lymphocytes.

Text 142
10.1126/sciimmunol.aal2192
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 1. single-cell mrna sequencing of pbtii cells. (a) pbtii cells were transferred from a single donor to multiple recipients. the numbers denote single cells from which mrna-sequencing (mrna-seq) data were successfully recorded. numbers in parentheses refer to the replicate experiment presented in fig s12. (b and c) representative fluorescence-activated cell sorting (facs) plots showing bifurcation of splenic th1 (t-bet+ifnf067+) and tfh (bcl6+cxcr5+) pbtii cd4+ t cells at day 7 post-infection (p.i.) with pcas. (d) flow cytometry data indicate concurrent differentiation of th1 (ifnf067+) and tfh (cxcr5+) pbtii cd4+ t cells within the spleen of pcas-infected mice (n = 4). index expression is the product of mean fluorescence intensity and proportion ifnf067+ or cxcr5+. data are representative of two independent experiments. (e) pca of single pbtii cells at day 7 after infection with pcas. the arrows represent pearson correlation with pc1 and pc2. cell size refers to the number of detected genes. “th1 signature” and “tfh signature” refer to cumulative expression of genes associated with th1 or tfh phenotypes [total transcripts per million (tpm) of all genes in the set] (15). (f) expression levels of the leading 50 genes with the largest pc2 loadings at day 7 (d). genes were annotated as either th1- or tfh-associated on the basis of public data sets (15, 37, 44, 47). cdk2ap2 appears twice because two alternative genomic annotations exist.']. Reference sentences:[results scrna-seq resolves th1 and tfh cell fates during plasmodium infection in mice we used scrna-seq to elucidate the de- velopment and heterogeneity of th1 and tfh cells during pcas infection (fig 1a and fig s1).flow cy- tometric measurements of the canoni- cal th1 markers t-bet (coded by tbx21) and interferon- (ifn) and tfh markers cxcr5 and bcl6 indicated that these sub- sets emerged in parallel by day 7 after in- fection (fig 1 b to d and fig s3) (13 14).as expected the variability related to previously established th1 and tfh gene expression signatures became more prominent with time separating two subpopulations at day 7 (fig 1 e and f) (15).together these results suggested a progressive commitment to fig 1.fig 14) (18–22).fig 11 and 12) (23 24) suggesting that our approach is more generally applicable for studying cellular differentiation us- ing scrna- seq data.to validate the robustness of these gene signatures and the timing of the bifurcation we repeated the infection and at days 0 4 and 7 se- quenced additional pbtii cells using the smart-seq2 protocol (fig 1a and fig s12a).data from all cells and mice (fig 1a) were pooled.fig 11) and in principle toward multiple fates (comp.fig 12).]
Patterns of correlation between gene expressions in single cells during infection with pcas, revealing th1 and tfh cell fates.

Text 143
10.1038/ng.3806
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 3 single-cell transcriptomes from multiregion samples. (a) expression profiles of individual tumor cells from three samples of gbm9 (left initial, right initial, and relapse) according to expression subtype32. for each cell, the subtype with the highest expression is marked with an asterisk. several egfr genomic alterations could be identified in the single-cell expression data (yellow), despite the abundance of missing data (gray). (b) topological representation of the expression data of individual tumor cells from gbm9, labeled by sample of origin. each node represents a set of cells with similar transcriptional profiles. a cell can appear in several nodes, and two nodes are connected by an edge if they have at least one cell in common. (c,d) topological representations of gbm9 where tumor cells are labeled by expression of egfr (c) and mitotic genes (d). tpm, transcripts per million. (e) expression profiles of individual tumor cells from gbm10 (two samples: 5-ala+ and 5-ala−). the p value for comparison of the proneural and 5-ala profiles was obtained using fisher’s exact test. the p value for comparison of the mesenchymal profile and ltbp4 expression was calculated using spearman’s correlation. atrx fusion was validated by rt–pcr assays (supplementary fig 7b,c). (f,g) topological representations of expression data for individual tumor cells from patients gbm10 (f) and gbm2 (g), where tumors cells are labeled by the sample of origin. (h) expression profiles of individual tumor cells from patient gbm2 shown according to gbm expression subtype. asterisks indicate the representative subtype identities of the corresponding cells.']. Reference sentences:[]
Summary: Correlation patterns between expression of specific genes and subtypes across different cells in single-cell transcriptomes.

Text 144
10.1038/ng.3818
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 7 single-cell transcriptome signatures stratify crc tumors into subgroups with distinct patient survival. (a) the ‘fibroblast-like’ signature is correlated with poor patient survival. in the clustering heat maps, rows represent bulk tumor samples from distinct patients with crc and columns represent the projection of tumor samples onto the six most abundant cell type populations from scrna–seq data. the colors for the survival curves match those used for the s1, s2 and s3 subgroups in the heat maps. os, overall survival; rfs, relapse-free survival. (b) table summarizing the contribution of each cell type signature in the s1, s2 and s3 subgroups. (c) bulk projection heat maps and survival analysis of the enterocyte and goblet-like tumors from the gse14333 cohort according to the previously published crca system34.']. Reference sentences:[]
Patterns related to correlation between cell type signatures and patient survival in CRC tumors are shown in the figure. The 'fibroblast-like' signature is correlated with poor patient survival. The distribution of cell type signatures contributes to distinct patient subgroups.

Text 145
10.1038/ncb3493
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 7 the degree of transcriptomic priming is quantitatively linked to multipotency and proliferative capacity. (a) comparison between the inferred amount of transcriptomic priming srel of the founder cell and the resulting colony size (cell number). (i) illustration. (ii) qualitative link. (iii) quantitative link. errors bars denote s.e.m. p value is from a pearson product moment correlation test with n = 1,031 single cells. (b) comparison between the']. Reference sentences:[utilizing all recorded surface markers for linear models on the single-cell rna-seq data allowed us to quantitatively predict the dominant cell type present in the single-cell cultures for the lin−cd34+cd38+ (p =3.7×10−23) and the lin−cd34+cd38− compartment (p =3.7×10−22 fig 6a(iii) and supplementary fig 7a for the full specification of regression models).moreover predicting erythroid and megakaryocytic priming individually revealed that the amount of lineage-specific priming was linked to functional lineage commitment (fig 6bc and supplementary fig 7bc).however colonies derived from mk-primed cells were frequently dominated by other cell types due to their lower proliferative capacity ex vivo (supplementary fig 7b).we next estimated the degree of transcriptomic lineage priming srel for individual cells from the culture experiments (fig 7ab).transcriptomic lineage priming formed small colonies (fig 7a) of a single-cell type (fig 7b).in contrast primitive hspcs (low inferred srel) frequently displayed multi- or bilineage potential (fig 7b) and generated much larger colonies (fig 7a).however not all of the primitive hspcs displayed multipotency but frequently appeared to be lineage-restricted while typically retaining a high proliferative capacity comparable to their multipotent counterparts (fig 7c).progenitors that formed exclusively erythroid colonies in the presence of epo were unable to give rise to alternative lineages in the absence of epo (fig 7d).in line with the predictions of our model the degree of transcriptomic priming was anticorrelated to the propensity of cells to generate daughters with variable lineage composition (supplementary fig 7de).the most likely dominant direction of priming was estimated for each founder cell from index-culture based on regression models constructed on all surface markers and compared with the observed colony composition (see supplementary fig 7a).see also supplementary fig 7c.see also supplementary fig 7c.this coincides with the observation that most progenitors at this stage display narrow restriction in their developmental potential whereas some progenitor cells remain oligopotent15 (fig 7b srel bin 3).in all cases this step is accompanied by cell cycle activation cd38 surface marker upregulation (fig 8c) and unipotency (fig 7b srel bin 4 and 5).such inhibitory interactions may render oligopotent progenitors unstable71015 and thus less abundant than previously anticipated (fig 7b).for the experiment displayed in fig 7d epo was left out from the medium.for the ‘split-in-four’ experiment (supplementary fig 7de) colonies were evaluated 7 days after seeding of single cells and colonies with more than 50 cells were equally split into 4 wells and cultured for an additional 14 days before colony size and lineage output were scored.the regression coeﬃcients of these models are shown in supplementary fig 7a together with the r2 these models achieve in tenfold cross-validation if applied to the single-cell transcriptomic data.ery (precision: 92%) mk (precision: 5%) neutro (precision: 94%) direction of priming % of colonies dominant cell type erythroid megakaryocyte myeloid index-culture: dominant cell type in colony index-omics: dominant direction of priming dominant direction of priming = mk/ery (figure 4a) −0.4 −0.2 0.0 0.2 srel (figure 4b) −0.1 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 amount of megakaryocytic priming (figure 4c) −0.10 −0.05 0.00 amount of erythroid priming (figure 4d) −0.04 0.00 0.04 0.08 cd34 cd38 cd45ra cd71 cd90 cd135 regression coefficient kel fsc-h fsc-a ssc-h ssc-a lin r2=0.72 r2=0.56 r2=0.37 r2=0.43 b d e c a                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       kel mrna expression tfrc (cd71) mrna expression degree of mk priming (index-omics) degree of ery priming (index-omics) % of mk cells in colony (index-culture) % of ery cells in colony (index-culture)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              kel mrna expression tfrc (cd71) mrna expression                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 kel (facs) cd71 (facs)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              kel (facs) cd71 (facs) 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 0 50 100 1 2 3 4 5 predicted bin of srel % of cells daughter colonies composition differs colony 1 mk colony 2 mk colony 3 mk colony 4 mk colony 1 ery colony 2 ery colony 3 ery colony 4 ery colony 1 my colony 2 my colony 3 my colony 4 my -log10 p-value -log10 p-value srel(inferred) srel(inferred) log10 cell count 1.5 0 4 1 0 1 2 3 4 p = 0.08 0 33 66 100 weak differences in daughter colonies composition                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 supplementary figure 7 the quantitative link between index-omics and index-culture.]
Patterns related to the correlation between transcriptomic priming and multipotency/proliferative capacity are shown. The degree of priming influences colony size and lineage commitment.

Text 146
10.1038/ncb3493
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 6 the direction of transcriptomic priming is quantitatively linked to functional lineage potential. (a) comparison of the predominant direction of priming d (lympho/myeloid versus megakaryocyte/erythroid) obtained from single-cell transcriptomics to the dominant cell type observed in colonies from single-cell culture. (i) illustration. (ii) qualitative comparison of the two quantities with respect to cd45ra and cd135 surface marker expression. (iii) quantitative link. the most likely dominant direction of priming was estimated for each founder cell from index-culture based on regression models constructed on all surface markers and compared with the observed colony composition (see supplementary fig 7a). p values are from a fisher test with n = 434 cells (left panel) and n = 193 cells (right panel). (b) comparison between inferred amount of transcriptomic mk priming and the percentage of cd41+ mk cells per colony. errors bars denote s.e.m. p value is from a pearson product moment correlation test with n = 627 single cells that formed colonies. see also supplementary fig 7c. (c) comparison between inferred amount of transcriptomic erythroid']. Reference sentences:[importantly these results are not due to limitations of the bioin- formatics method as stemnet is able to detect both subsequent branching points and discrete intermediate populations on simulated data (supplementary fig 6a–d).moreover applying diﬀusion pseu- dotime (dpt) a diﬀerent recently published method for the inference of developmental trajectories24 to our data confirmed the absence of subsequent binary branch points and the direct lineage commit- ment from cloud-hspcs along continuous trajectories (supple- mentary fig 6e).for example the stemnet-predicted dominant direction of transcriptional priming into the lympho/ myeloid versus the megakaryocytic/erythroid direction was strongly correlated to the surface marker expression of cd135 and cd45ra (fig 6a(iii)) which could be used to qualitatively predict the predominant cell type in colonies of our single-cell cultures (note that lymphoid progenitors do not grow in these conditions and that myeloid sublineages are not resolved) (fig 6a(ii)).utilizing all recorded surface markers for linear models on the single-cell rna-seq data allowed us to quantitatively predict the dominant cell type present in the single-cell cultures for the lin−cd34+cd38+ (p =3.7×10−23) and the lin−cd34+cd38− compartment (p =3.7×10−22 fig 6a(iii) and supplementary fig 7a for the full specification of regression models).moreover predicting erythroid and megakaryocytic priming individually revealed that the amount of lineage-specific priming was linked to functional lineage commitment (fig 6bc and supplementary fig 7bc).stemnet further predicted lin−cd34+cd38−cd45ra−cd90−cd135− cells to be primed towards megakaryocytic diﬀerentiation (fig 6d left panel).as predicted these cells which we termed mk-primed mpps predominantly generated thrombocytes if compared with mlps and hscs (fig 6d right panel).to test the ability of the stemnet method to uncover binary branching events and discrete subpopulations we quantitatively specified alternative models of cell fate specification and reshuﬄed our original data according to these models (supplementary fig 6).for the scenario depicted in supplementary fig 6a cells were generated by randomly drawing values h from a beta distribution with parameters (23).for the scenario depicted in supplementary fig 6d cells were then scattered around the nearest node assuming an average distance of 0.01.gene expression values for these genes were then reordered across cells i to follow the developmental distance d(ci vj) (that is assuming that gene expression of lineage-specific genes was entirely determined by developmental distance supplementary fig 6a).alternatively gene expression values were randomly reshuﬄed such that the correlation between developmental distance from vj and gene expression equals the empirically observed correlation between gene expression and pj from the stemnet classifier (supplementary fig 6b–d).reorder expression data (shown: reordered expression of csf3r a neutrophil marker) simulate data assuming a realistic noise level simulation of data from an alternative model development distance from “neutro” fate csf3r expression data simulations a b d application of a diferent method (dpt) to real data e c hsc mpp cmp gmp gp mep b b cell mono mono neutro neutro baso baso ery ery mk mk hsc mpp gmp gp mep csf3r expression 0 20 40 60 −0.5 0.0 0.5 pearson correlation gene expression and developmental distance # of marker genes 0 20 40 60 −0.5 0.0 0.5 # of marker genes pks = 0.94 hsc mpp cmp gmp gp mep b erybasoneutromono mk hsc mpp cmp gmp gp mep b erybasoneutromono mk (legend see left panel) (legend see panel a) hsc hsc hsc/mpp mpp mpp cmp cmp cmp cmp gmp gmp gmp gp gp gp mep mep mep b b b mono mono mono neutro neutro neutro baso baso baso ery ery ery mk mk mk cd38+ population (from main figure 2) facs-based         b eobaso erythroid hsc (stringent gate) megakaryocyte monod neutrophil other “cloud-hspc”                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       −0.05 0.00 0.05 −0.05 0.00 0.05 dc1 dc2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.0 0.1 −0.20 −0.15 −0.10 −0.05 0.00 0.05 dc3 dc4 supplementary figure 6 simulation of data from alternative models of cell fate specification.]
Patterns related to correlation between transcriptomic priming and functional lineage potential were observed, quantitatively linked to surface marker expression and lineage commitment in single cells.

Text 147
10.1126/science.aai8478
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 2. glial lineages are shared among idh-a and idh-o. (a) average expression levels of oligodendrocytespecific and astrocyte-specific genes across all idh-a (y axis) and idh-o (x axis) malignant cells. (b) correlations of oligodendrocyte-specific and astrocyte-specific genes with pc1 (x axis) and pc2 (y axis) from a pca of all idh-a malignant cells. (c) classification of malignant cells (columns) from idh-a and idh-o according to the differential expression of 50 oligodendrocytic and 50 astrocytic genes. bottom: relative expression of the 100 genes (rows). top: significance of differential expression [–log10(p value of a t test)] between oligodendrocytic and astrocytic genes. cells were sorted by significance from the most oligodendrocyticlike to the most astrocytic-like cells; dashed lines indicate a significance threshold of p < 0.01. (d) for each malignant cell in idh-a and idh-o, we show its differentiation scores (x axis, maximum of oligodendrocytic and astrocytic scores) versus the average expression of idh-a–specific or idh-o–specific genes (left and right y axes, excluding those genes that exhibit differential expression due to genetic alterations). lines indicate the corresponding local weighted smoothing regression (lowess), demonstrating the decreased differences between idh-a and idh-o programs in cells with low glial differentiation scores.']. Reference sentences:[indeed we ob- served limited differences in the expression of astrocyte-specific and oligodendrocyte-specific genes between idh-a and idh-o either in bulk or in single-cell profiles (fig 2a).after subtracting intertumor differences (11) principal components analysis (pca) across all idh-a cells demonstrated that principal com- ponents pc1 and pc2 are associated with astrocyte- specific (pc1/2-high) and oligodendrocyte-specific (pc1/2-low) genes (fig 2b and table s3; p < 10−9 hypergeometric test).venteicher et al. science 355 eaai8478 (2017) 31 march 2017 3 of 11 fig 2.these expression programs—which were not accounted for by intertumor differences nor by technical and batch effects (fig s5 a and b and fig s6a)—were reproduced in an analysis of 3538 additional cells from two idh-a tumors profiled with a different single-cell rna-seq pro- tocol (fig s5c) and were also coexpressed among idh-o cells (fig 2c).we scored individual cells in each tumor type for expression of these pro- grams; we then used these scores to classify cells with preferential expression of each program as well as intermediate cellular states (fig 2c).all tumors exhibited a wide distribution of cellular states yet there were more idh-a cells in inter- mediate states (fig 2c and fig s6a).however differences between idh-a and idh-o in the expression of the remaining 83 differentially expressed genes (table s3) were most pronounced in differentiated tumor cells and were almost com- pletely abolished among the most undifferent- iated cancer cells (fig 2d).lineage and differentiation scores variability among malignant idh-a cells as re- flected by the first principal component (pc1) is consistent with astrocyte-specific (pc1-low genes) and oligodendrocyte-specific (pc1-high) genes (fig 2b and table s3).]
Patterns of correlation between astrocyte-specific and oligodendrocyte-specific genes in malignant cells from different tumor types.

Text 148
10.1126/science.aai8478
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 3. undifferentiated cells in idh-a and idh-o are associated with cycling cells and a putative stemness program. (a) percentage of cycling cells (y axis) in sliding windows of 200 cells ranked by differentiation scores (x axis) for either idh-a or idh-o malignant cells. (b) pearson correlations (color scale) between the expression profiles of 90 genes preferentially expressed in undifferentiated cells, across idh-a (top) and idh-o (bottom) undifferentiated cells. genes are ordered by their correlation with the highest-scoring cluster in']. Reference sentences:[we found high similarity in dna methylation between idh-a and idh-o relative to both idh–wild-type gliomas and idh-mutant non- venteicher et al. science 355 eaai8478 (2017) 31 march 2017 4 of 11 fig 3.generalizing this finding across all idh-mutant glioma classes we identified cycling cells on the basis of the expression of consensus cell cycle signatures (fig s8a) (11 12 14) and found that in both idh-a and idh-o only a small proportion of cells are proliferating (~4% on aver- age in our cohort) and that there is an inverse correlation between proliferation and differentia- tion (fig 3a).remarkably the fraction of cycling cells for a given state of differentiation is similar between idh-a and idh-o (fig 3a).ninety genes were enriched within undifferentiated cells of at least three distinct tumors and were examined further for their coexpression among undiffer- entiated idh-a and idh-o cells (fig 3b).we de- fined a putative glioma stemness program as the subset of genes that are both enriched and co- expressed in undifferentiated cells of both idh-a and idh-o (fig 3c).we valid- ated this tumor architecture in idh-a tissues in 14 additional cases (table s1) showing in each tumor (i) two glial lineages of cancer cell differentiation (ii) mutually exclusive expression of cycling (by ki-67 staining) and differentiation (by apoe ex- pression)markersand (iii) coexpression of cycling (ki-67) and putative stem cell (sox4) markers (fig 3d and table s1).]
Summary: Correlation patterns in gene expression of undifferentiated cells in idh-a and idh-o, revealing a putative stemness program.

Text 149
10.1016/j.cels.2017.03.010
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 2. an analysis pipeline for integrating single-cell nf-kb activities and single-cell transcriptomes identifies genes differentially expressed between populations with distinct nf-kb dynamic profiles (a) the single-cell scale pipeline quantifies and performs quality control on both live-cell imaging and scrna-seq data. image segmentation and time-series normalization is conducted to quantify the signaling dynamics while kallisto is used to align sequencing reads and quantify the transcriptome (bray et al., 2016). all data and metadata are then stored in cell objects after processing. (b) collections of cell objects are fed into the population scale pipeline, which performs time-series clustering on the signaling dynamics to identify subpopulations and then uses a bayesian inference approach to compute the subpopulation transcriptomes from single-cell transcriptomes. (c) time series clustering using a cross-correlation-based similarity metric and hierarchical clustering identifies three subpopulations with distinct nf-kb dynamics as described in figure 1a. each individual cell is assigned a subpopulation based on its nf-kb dynamics. (d) using the method outlined in paparrizos and gravano (2015), we can compute a representative profile of the nf-kb activity for each cluster. (e) single-cell transcriptomes are then measured for each cell in (c), allowing us to have a record of nf-kb activity and transcription profile specific to each cell. fpm, fragments per million. (f) using the bayesian inference method described in kharchenko et al. (2014), we can integrate all of the single-cell transcriptomes measured for each cluster to infer the subpopulation gene expression for each gene. integrating the transcriptomes within each cluster identifies genes that are differentially expressed based on the cell’s nf-kb dynamics. four of the genes shown here were chosen to illustrate cases with significant expression differences between one or more subpopulations, with prdx1 added as a comparison gene for which no difference was observed. single-cell expression heatmaps for the complete set of genes considered further in this study are shown in figure s1c.']. Reference sentences:[available about an individual cell (figure 2a).furthermore it enables a c d e f b figure 2.we then used a bayesian infer- ence approach to compute the transcriptome for each subpop- ulation at each time point (figure 2f).our bioinformatics pipeline consists of two arms: data harvesting and preprocessing and integrated analysis (figure 2).it also enables the computation of fold changes and credible intervals (figure 2f).]
Patterns related to correlation between nf-kb dynamics and gene expression in subpopulations are identified using single-cell data integration.

Text 150
10.1016/j.cell.2017.03.038
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 2. single-cell rna-seq analysis reveals molecular heterogeneity of tacs (a) experimental strategy to purify the tacs at the epithelial-mesenchymal border. left: expression patterns of p-cadherin, integrin b1, and transgenic lhx2-gfp in the hair bulb. right: purification scheme. (b) scatterplots showing correlation between two batches of single-cell rna-seq, left, and two biological replicates of rna-seq on bulk facs-sorted populations, right. (c) left: unbiased clustering of transcriptomes of individual basal tacs from ana-vi hfs. each cell is represented as a dot, colored by a clustering algorithm and plotted on the t-sne graph. right: heatmap showing transcriptome similarities between single cells measured by pearson’s correlation coefficient matrix. clusters are color coded along the axes. (d) top: t-sne plot showing the cell-cycle status of each cluster. bottom: t-sne plot showing tchh expression. although a marker of differentiating medulla and irs cells, trichohyalin (tchh) was only expressed in basal medulla progenitors (arrows). the dotted line denotes epidermal-dermal border. note that cluster 1 (c1) is non-proliferative and expresses many medulla genes. (e) immunoﬂuorescence showing edu+ s-phase cells, integrin a6, and p-cadherin in the mature hair bulb. (f) t-sne plots showing second-level sub-clustering of c2 and c3 into six, left, and two sub-clusters, right, respectively. all scale bars, 50 mm. see also figures s1 and s2; tables s1 and s2.']. Reference sentences:[overall the batch-to-batch variation of pooled tac single-cell data was comparable to that of con- ventional rna-seq of bulk populations indicating the fidelity of our single-cell data (figure 2b).this cluster showed signs of an early medulla signa- ture (figure 2d).second-level clustering analysis revealed that the largest proliferative cluster (c2) contained six distinct sub-clus- ters while the smaller (c3) contained at least two distinct sub- clusters (figure 2f).a b c d e f figure 2.purification of hair follicle cells from mouse skin related to figure 2 (a) facs-purification strategy of ors basal tacs and suprabasal tacs.quality control of single-cell rna-seq analysis of basal tacs related to figure 2 (a) boxplot showing the number of total rna-seq reads mapped to annotated genes.note that the clustering results are similar to the results of unsupervised hi- erarchical clustering (figure 2f).]
Summary: Correlation analysis of single-cell transcriptomes reveals molecular heterogeneity and cell-cycle status of basal tacs in hair follicles.

Text 151
10.1038/nbt.3854
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 3 differentiation of pluripotent mescs into motor neurons (mn). (a) sctda recapitulates chronological order based on expression data alone. the topological representation of the expression data of 1,964 single cells, sampled from the differentiation of mescs into mns, is labeled by sampling time. the root node, inferred from the experimental chronological information, is indicated with a red circle. (b) the distance of each node to the root node, represented as a function of sampling time. the chronological time of a node is defined as the mean of the sampling times of the cells in the node. (c) comparison with standard dimensional-reduction algorithms. dimensional reduction of the same expression data of 1,964 single cells, sampled from the differentiation of mescs into mns, using pca, mds, and t-sne. the pearson’s correlation coefficient between the sampling time and the two-dimensional euclidean distance to the root cell (defined as the one that maximizes this correlation) is indicated in each case. (d) consistency between experiments 1 and 2. left: venn diagram of genes with significant gene connectivity (q < 0.05) in the topological representations of the two data sets. both experiments are highly consistent in their calls (fisher exact test p value < 10−100). the number of significant genes is larger in experiment 2, consistent with its higher statistical power (due to the larger number of cells considered). right: correlation between the centroid (expressed in pseudotime) of the n = 2,701 genes with significant (q < 0.05) gene connectivity in both topological representations. the distribution of gene centroids is highly consistent across the two experiments. (e) known markers of pluripotent cells, motor neuron progenitors, and postmitotic neurons are successfully ordered. the topological representation is labeled by mrna levels of oct3/4 (red), olig2 (green) and vacht (blue).']. Reference sentences:[]
Patterns of correlation between sampling time and distance to root cell in single-cell differentiation from pluripotent cells to motor neurons are shown. Gene connectivity and consistency between experiments are also highlighted.

Text 152
10.1016/j.cmet.2017.04.014
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 7. srf regulates proliferation genes in b cells (a) heatmap showing pearson correlation of gene expression profiles in all 387 b cells comparing proliferation genes with top pseudotemporally regulated oxidative phosphorylation genes and tfs. proliferation genes are depicted in red, oxidative phosphorylation genes in orange, and tfs in black. (b) overview of rna-seq analysis of lentiviral srf overexpression in islets at p28. (c) gsea plots showing enrichment of proliferation genes regulated during pseudotime (left) and genes downregulated during pseudotime (right) as an effect of srf overexpression. rna-seq data are from three independent transduction experiments. normalized enrichment score (nes) and enrichment p value are indicated. (d) rpkm values of tfs fos, junb, and egr1 (top) and proliferation genes mki67, pcna, and ccne1 (bottom) in rna-seq data from control and srf-overexpressing islets. data shown as mean ± sem from three replicates. (e) summary of metabolic regulators and effector tfs driving early neonatal b cell proliferation as revealed by reconstructing a pseudotemporal time course of b cell maturation, experimental validation, and prior literature. p < 0.01, p < 0.001. see also figure s7 and table s7.']. Reference sentences:[the analysis revealed significant co-variation (p < 0.001) of both oxidative phosphory- lation and tf genes with proliferation genes (figure 7a).to determine the role of srf in b cell gene regulation we overexpressed srf via lenti- viral delivery in primary mouse islets and performed rna-seq (figure 7b).confirming a role for srf in the regulation of proliferation genes proliferation-associ- ated genes were expressed at significantly higher levels after srf overexpression (figure 7c).furthermore mrnas decreasing in expression dur- ing the pseudotemporal trajectory were enriched in srf-overex- pressing islets (figure 7c).among the genes significantly induced by srf were fos junb and egr1 (figure 7d; table s7) demonstrating that srf acts as an upstream regulator of these tfs also in islets.by quantifying 1170 cell metabolism 25 1160–1175 may 2 2017 72 hrs rna-seq primary islets beta-cell proliferation amino acids mtros glucose junb fos egr1 srf app atp5c1 atp5d cox4i1 cox5a cox5b cox6a1 cox7b cyc1 hdac1 hsph1 ndufa12 ndufa9 ndufb10 ndufb11 ndufb4 ndufb5 ndufb7 ndufb9 ndufs4 prdx2 prdx3 rps3 sirt1 slc25a4 stk25 uqcrc2 uqcrfs1 uqcrh zfp622 atf3 atf4 egr1 egr2 etv1 fev fos fosb fosl2 gata6 hmgb2 id2 id3 irf1 jun junb klf10 klf4 mafb maff nr4a1 nr4a2 rel srf tead1 tox3 ybx1 zbtb10 zfp655 zfp868 zwint wsb1 vps25 tyms tubb2a tpm1 tnfaip3 srsf3 smc5 sik1 rhob rbbp4 ppp1ca plk2 pim3 pim2 nsmce2 mlf1 mau2 lmna larp4 ivns1abp herpud1 dusp1 dnajb1 csnk2a2 cks1b calm2 arl6ip1 apitd1 -0.5 0.5 0 0 p = 0 nes= 2.53 p = 0.004 nes= 1.2 control control srf overexpression srf overexpression proliferation genes regulated with pseudotime down-regulated genes with pseudotime 0.6 0.25 control or srf lentivirus e b c d a fos junb egr1 0 40 80 control srf rpkm value mki67 pcna ccne1 0 8 16 24 control srf rpkm value figure 7.features we found to be associated with immature proliferative b cells are high expression of regulators of amino acid metabolism and high ros production as well as a network of nutrient-responsive tfs (figure 7e).]
Correlation patterns between proliferation genes, oxidative phosphorylation genes, and transcription factors in b cells.

Text 153
10.1016/j.cmet.2017.04.014
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 4. amino acid supplementation increases b cell proliferation (a) amino acid transporter and metabolism genes downregulated with pseudotime with pearson correlation coefficients. (b) heatmap showing pearson correlation of gene expression in all 387 b cells comparing proliferation genes with genes encoding amino acid transporters and metabolizing enzymes downregulated with pseudotime. proliferation genes are depicted in rows and amino acid transporters and metabolizing enzymes in columns. (c) plasma concentration of individual amino acids in mice at p1 (blue) and p28 (red). data shown as mean ± sem (n = 4 mice per group). (d and e) percentage of edu+ b cells (d) and non-b cells (e) in islets from mice at p28 supplemented with nucleotides or amino acids. (f) quantitative rt-pcr analysis of proliferation genes after supplementation with serine, tyrosine, or nucleotides. mrna levels in control islets were set as 1.']. Reference sentences:[based on the observed decrease in expression of multiple amino acid trans- porter and metabolism genes during maturation (figure 4a) and their co-variation with proliferation genes at the single-cell level (figure 4b) we hypothesized that amino acid deprivation could contribute to the postnatal decline in b cell proliferation.plasma levels of most proteinogenic amino acids decreased between p1 and p28 (figure 4c) indicating environmental changes in b cell amino acid availability.addition of serine tyrosine or nucleo- tides significantly increased proliferation rates of b cells at p28 (figure 4d) an effect that was not observed for non-b islet cells (figure 4e).accordingly sup- plementation of serine tyrosine or nucleotides increased expression of several proliferation genes which are downregu- lated in the pseudotemporal maturation time course (figure 4f).notably glutamine supplementation failed to enhance b cell pro- liferation (figure 4d) which could be because glutamine uptake rates were significantly lower in islets from mice at p28 compared to p1 (figure 4g).combined these findings suggest that changes in plasma amino acid levels as well as b cell amino acid uptake and metabolism could cause an amino acid- deprived state that contributes to the postnatal decline in b cell proliferation (figure 4h).1166 cell metabolism 25 1160–1175 may 2 2017 a slc38a5 glud1 oat gls slc7a2 slc38a2 aldh18a1 gstz1 glul arg1 slc1a5 aldh4a1 psat1 ass1 asnsd1 slc7a5 0 -0.2 -0.4 -0.6 correlation coefficient with pseudotime percentage of edu+ non-beta-cells f aldh18a1 aldh4a1 arg1 asnsd1 ass1 gls glud1 gstz1 oat psat1 slc1a5 slc38a2 slc38a5 slc7a2 slc7a5 zwint wsb1 vps25 tyms tubb2a tpm1 tnfaip3 srsf3 smc5 sik1 rhob rbbp4 ppp1ca plk2 pim3 pim2 nsmce2 mlf1 mau2 lmna larp4 ivns1abp herpud1 dusp1 dnajb1 csnk2a2 cks1b calm2 arl6ip1 apitd1 d percentage of edu+ beta-cells h c plasma concentration (nmol/ml) -0.4 0.4 0 400 800 1200 1600 ala asn asp glu gln gly his hyp ile leu lys met phe pro ser thr trp tyr val p1 p28 b e p1 p28 0 1 2 islet glutamine uptake (pmol/μg/hr) g amino acids glutamine nucleotide synthesis glutamate α-ketoglutarate beta-cell proliferation other amino acids tca glud1 gls amino acid synthesis slc transporters immature beta-cell mature beta-cell srf pim2 pim3 sik1 plk2 apitd1 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 control ser tyr nucleotides relative mrna level control gln ser pro tyr lys nucleotides 0 1 2 3 control gln ser pro tyr lys nucleotides 0 1 2 3 figure 4.]
Correlation between proliferation genes and amino acid metabolism genes in b cells, impacting postnatal proliferation decline.

Text 154
10.1016/j.cmet.2017.04.014
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 3. postnatal b cell development is associated with expression changes of genes regulating amino acid uptake and metabolism, mitochondrial respiration, and ros production (a) schematic of workﬂow. to identify genes regulated during pseudotime, we performed continuous gsea on annotated gene sets and de novo gene sets obtained by hierarchical clustering. (b) molecular pathways regulated in pseudotime from annotated gene sets. (c) heatmap showing average transcript expression of all genes within de novo gene sets showing significant correlation with pseudotime ordering (c1–c9). number of genes in each set is shown on the right. (d) heatmaps for each de novo gene set showing expression of selected genes involved in cell proliferation (red), insulin secretion (green), regulation of ros (black), mitochondrial function (orange), immediate early genes (purple), and amino acid metabolism (blue) with pseudotime. see also figure s4 and table s4.']. Reference sentences:[analysis of annotated pathways revealed negative correlation with genes involved in cell cycle control and proliferation with the pseudo- temporal time course (figure 3b; table s4a) confirming the ability of our time ordering method to resolve transcriptomes of immature proliferative b cells.from this we identified nine clusters (c1–c9) that showed significant correlation with the reconstructed trajectory of b cell maturation (figure 3c; table s4b).consistent with the obser- vation that proliferative b cells can be resolved with our time ordering method (figure 2d) clusters c2 and c3 were enriched for genes encoding proteins involved in cell cycle control comprising dna replication mitotic spindle assembly and mitotic checkpoint proteins in cluster c2 and proteins with func- tions in the p53 and mapk pathways in cluster c3 (figure 3d; ta- ble s4c).we further observed concordant regulation of multiple genes involved in amino acid metabolism in cluster c6 (figure 3d; table s4c) namely a progressive decrease in the expression of the transmembrane amino acid transporters slc7a2 and slc38a5 as well as gls and glud1 which convert glutamine into glutamate and a-ketogluterate (akg) respec- tively.mitochondrial ros promotes b cell proliferation in addition to amino acid metabolic genes numerous mitochon- drial genes exhibited a significant decrease in expression during pseudotemporal maturation (figure 3d).genes encoding antioxi- dant enzymes decreased during the pseudotemporal b cell cell metabolism 25 1160–1175 may 2 2017 1165 b d c1 c2 c3 fos txnip pdgfa proliferation insulin secretion amino acid metabolism mitochondrial function ros regulation -3 3 expression z-score mapk pi3k-mtor pdgf notch myc targets e2f1 targets regulation of cell cycle hypoxia er stress regulation of ros nucleotides amino acids carbohydrate fatty acid citric acid cycle oxidative phosphorylation mitochondrial respiratory chain transport s tr e s s r e s p o n s e r e c e pt o r s p r ol if e ra ti o n m et ab ol is m c continuous gsea de novo gene sets gene sets gene sets pseudotime increasing decreasing hierarchical clustering significant gene sets annotated gene sets msigdb pathway 1 pathway 2 ... a pseudotime regulated in pseudotime n=62 n=103 n=330 n=121 n=195 n=74 n=460 n=46 n=64 nuclear receptors purinergic receptors # of genes c1 c2 c3 c4 c5 c6 c7 c8 c9 pseudotime pseudotime nr4a1 jun becn1 map2k7 map2k6 trp53 usp10 cdkn1a ins2 ins1 cox6a2 g6pc2 slc2a2 ero1lb sytl4 pcsk1 pclo smc1a orc6 pola1 rfc5 rfc2 rfc3 pola2 cdc7 mcm2 c4 c5 c6 cox6a1 cox4i1 romo1 uqcrb cox6b1 prdx2 sod1 slc25a3 gpx4 slc25a39 ndufa12 cox7b slc7a2 gls higd1a glud1 gpx3 slc38a5 id1 id3 ndufa5 -3 3 expression z-score egr1 fosb junb atf3 srf fosl2 atf4 immediate early genes figure 3.]
Patterns related to gene expression changes in cell proliferation, insulin secretion, ROS regulation, mitochondrial function, immediate early genes, and amino acid metabolism during b cell development.

Text 155
10.1016/j.cmet.2017.04.014
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 1. single-cell rna sequencing of b cells during postnatal development (a) experimental overview. (b) correlation between average transcript levels of all genes detected in single cells and bulk cells. for single cells, gene expression was averaged across individual cells collected at different time points. points are colored by postnatal day (p) collected (p1, red; p7, green; p14, blue; p21, orange; and p28, black). the same color coding for groups was used across all figures. pearson correlation coefficients r are given.']. Reference sentences:[by providing gene expression profiles of individual cells single-cell rna sequencing (rna-seq) can overcome this prob- lem as subpopulations of cells can be identified based on 1160 cell metabolism 25 1160–1175 may 2 2017 ª 2017 elsevier inc. c e a b d figure 1.to probe this process in vivo we performed single-cell rna-seq on sorted b cells from mins1-h2b-mcherry mice (ben- ner et al. 2014) at postnatal day 1 (p1) p7 p14 p21 and p28 (figure 1a).at all ages the average profiles of single cells correlated highly with the bulk cell profile (r = 0.83– 0.87; figure 1b).average expression levels of ucn3 and mafb two genes known to be regulated during postnatal b cell devel- opment (blum et al. 2012; van der meulen et al. 2012) showed temporal regulation similar to bulk experiments (figure 1c).notably ucn3 and mafb exhibited high variability in cell-to-cell gene expression whereas the housekeeping gene calm1 did not (figure 1c).genome-wide transcript expres- sion between single cells at each time point showed only mod- erate correlation (r = 0.3–0.7; figure 1d) indicating considerable gene expression heterogeneity between age-matched cells.while the majority of b cells grouped together by age collected there was no clear separation between stages and cells from one age often crossed into the transcriptional space of other ages (figure 1e).]
Summary: Correlation between gene expression profiles of individual cells and bulk cells during postnatal development, showing high variability in cell-to-cell gene expression.

Text 156
10.1016/j.cmet.2017.04.014
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 5. mitochondrial ros production promotes b cell proliferation (a) facs analysis of tmrm ﬂuorescence intensity. blue, postnatal day (p) 1 without fccp; green, p1 with fccp; red, p28 without fccp; purple, p28 with fccp. mitochondrial tmre/mitotracker green uptake ratio is shown on the right. (b) schematic of pathways regulating ros clearance by antioxidant enzymes. (c) downregulated genes with pseudotime involved in ros regulation with their pearson correlation coefficient. (d) facs analysis of mitosoxred ﬂuorescence intensity at p1 (blue) and p28 (red). mitochondrial mitosoxred/mitotracker green ratios are shown on the right. (e) schematic of alleles in rip-cre;mcat;r26yfp mice (mcat mice). red triangles indicate loxp sites. (f and g) representative immunoﬂuorescence staining for insulin (green), brdu (red), and dapi (blue) (f) and quantification of the percentage of b cells expressing brdu (g) in 6-week-old control (rip-cre) and mcat mice. white arrows indicate ins+ki67+ cells in (f). (h) quantification of the b cell area relative to total pancreatic area in 6-week-old mcat and control mice. data shown as mean ± sem of three independent experiments (a and d) or three mice per group (g and h). scale bar, 20 mm. sod, superoxide dismutase; gr, glutamate receptor; gsh, glutathione; gssg, glutathione disulfide; gpx, glutathione peroxidase; cat, catalase; trx, thioredoxin; prx, peroxidase. p < 0.05, p < 0.01. see also figure s5.']. Reference sentences:[indeed islets at p28 exhibited lower mito- chondrial membrane potential than at p1 (figure 5a; figure s5a).the abundance of ros is determined by the balance between ros production and ros clearance through multiple antioxidant enzymes (figure 5b).(legend continued on next page) cell metabolism 25 1160–1175 may 2 2017 1167 maturation time course (figure 5c).despite reduced expression of antioxidant enzymes mitochondrial su- peroxide levels were significantly lower at p28 (figure 5d).we generated mice carrying the rip-cre transgene cre recombinase-inducible human catalase (mcat) inserted in the ubiquitously active gapdh locus and a condi- tional yfp reporter gene targeted to the rosa-26 locus (r26yfp) (hereinafter called mcat mice) (figure 5e).accordingly total b cell mass in mcat mice was significantly reduced (figure 5h).1168 cell metabolism 25 1160–1175 may 2 2017 100 0 % of max 0 10 5 intensity control mcat percentage of brdu+ beta-cells 0 2 4 6 b o2- sod h2o2- h2o cat trx prx gpx gsh gssg gr c x x d e f g h control mcat ins/brdu/dapi ins2 rosa26 gapdh rosa26 gapdh cre stop mcat yfp yfp mcat stop control mcat 0 0.04 0.08 beta-cell area/ total pancreas area 0 -0.2 -0.4 -0.6 correlation coefficient with pseudotime prdx5 prdx1 gpx7 sod1 gpx3 prdx2 sod2 gpx1 glrx3 prdx3 txn2 txnip prdx4 gpx4 txndc5 glrx5 a 0 10 5 intensity 100 0 % of max 0 2 6 tmrm relative to mitotracker intensity p1 p28 p1 p28 0 0.04 0.08 mitosoxred relative to mitotracker intensity 4 figure 5.]
Patterns related to correlation between downregulated genes and pseudotime in b cell proliferation.

Text 157
10.1016/j.cmet.2017.04.014
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 6. transcription factors and target genes regulated during postnatal b cell development (a) workﬂow to identify tfs driving gene expression changes during pseudotime. cis-regulatory analysis was performed on the most significant genes positively and negatively correlating with pseudo-']. Reference sentences:[first to identify the most highly regulated genes during b cell maturation we generated a list of genes positively and negatively correlating with the pseudotem- poral trajectory (p < 0.01; figure 6a; table s5a).second to deter- mine which tfs regulate these genes we performed cis-regula- tory analysis focusing on enhancers identified by the presence of distal h3k27ac chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing (chip-seq) signals in mouse islets and annotated tf binding mo- tifs at these enhancers (figure 6a).in addition zinc finger (sp1 and klf tfs) helix turn helix (rfx tfs) and ccaat motifs were among the 20 most highly enriched motifs at enhancer regions of downregulated genes (figure 6c; table s5b).consistent with the motif analysis the top 30 downregulated tfs comprised multiple members of the ets (etv1 fev) bzip (atf3 fosb fos jun maff junb atf4) and zinc finger (klf10 egr1 klf4 zfp868 zfp655 zbtb10 egr2) families (figure 6d).using the tfs in the network as a starting set (table s6a) the in- terest propagation algorithm retrieved an additional set of genes mostly related to cell proliferation (p = 0.0001 fisher test) and mrna processing (p = 1.85 3 10=7) as their most connected neighbors (figure 6e).we found that srf itself and its downstream targets are downregulated during b cell maturation (figure 6d) suggesting that srf could be responsible for the regulation of a large portion of the maturation-dependent tfs.moreover srf promotes a individual genes y = log2(rpkm+1) x = pseudotime significant genes correlation x-y b h3k27ac motifs c down-regulated genes tf p-value motif etv1 (ets) 1e-4 elk4 (ets) atf1 (bzip) 1e-2 1e-2 up-regulated genes tf p-value motif 1e-124 elf1 (ets) 1e-120 1e-103 elk1 (ets) sp1 (zf) klf5 (zf) atf1 (bzip) 1e-79 1e-78 d correlation coefficient with pseudotime 0.2 0 -0.2 -0.4 -0.6 -0.8 cre (bzip) rfx5 (hth) 1e-69 1e-63 atf3 fosb klf10 nr4a1 egr1 mafb srf fosl2 gata6 klf4 irf1 fos jun nr4a2 zfp868 zfp655 id3 tox3 etv1 zbtb10 foxj2 zfp189 ybx1 rel maff junb id2 atf4 hmgb2 fev tead1 egr2 nfy (ccaat) 1e-50 e figure 6.]
Patterns related to correlation between transcription factors and target genes during b cell development.

Text 158
10.1172/jci.insight.93009
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 2. pearson’s correlation between the average kidney single cell expression and a bulk sequenced renal biopsy. kidney single cells (n = 361) were averaged into a single “reconstructed” biopsy and correlated with a conventionally sequenced biopsy. each dot represents a gene. cell lineage markers for endothelial cells (light green: sele, pecam1, flt1, lyve1, vwf, mcam, flk1, cdh5, arhgdib, a2m, ptprb ), fibroblasts (dark green: mfap4, mfap5, col3a1, col1a2, prg4, col1a1, pla2g2a, apod), tubular cells (yellow: umod, slc12a1, spp1, ca12, aldob, calb1, pdzk1ip1, nat8, slc22a6, slc22a8, aqp1, slc34a1, slc12a3, scnn1b, clcn5, cldn16, gpx3, defb1, kcnj1, kng, scnn1a, slc22a2, pax8, slc23a3, kcnj15, mt1g, slc12a6, bhmt, aldob, slc13a1), and leukocytes (pink: cd14, lyz, fcer1g, cd4, ms4a6a, ptprc, itgax, mrc1, cd247, fcgr2a, ltb, marco, emr1, il10ra ) are highlighted.']. Reference sentences:[averaging of all single cell renal biopsy expression data and comparing with a bulk-tissue conventionally sequenced renal biopsy yielded a pearson’s correlation coefficient of 0.72 (p < 0.00001) indi- cating that the capture frequencies of single cells mirrored the overall tissue composition (figure 2).]
Summary: Correlation between single-cell and bulk biopsy gene expressions in kidney cells, showing overall tissue composition similarity.

Text 159
10.1038/ncomms15081
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 4 | intrinsic tumour cell heterogeneity. (a) subtype prediction of tumour cells as er þ , her2 þ or tnbc types using er and her2 module scores50 (r software package genefu, top left panel). heatmap of subtype-specifying module scores (top right) and pie charts (bottom) demonstrating intratumoral subtype heterogeneity in her2 tumours. (b) pearson’s correlation coefficient (r) between aggressive cancer gene expression signatures (emt, stemness and angiogenesis). horizontal and vertical dashed lines indicate signature score cut-offs at top 5%. the linear regression result is drawn as a solid line. the coloured dots mark cells with high expression signatures for both axis.']. Reference sentences:[application of this classification method predicted the subtype of the cancer genome atlas (tcga) breast cancer data set with 91% accuracy (supplementary fig 4).most carcinoma cells were confined within the boundary of the corresponding subtype category of the bulk tumour (fig 4a upper left) whereas some tumours show mixed subtype cells (fig 4a upper right).in particular carcinoma cells from her2-positive tumours had the most variable subtype composition from predominant her2 to mostly tnbc types (fig 4a bottom).notably emt stemness and angiogenesis signatures had positive correlations (fig 4b) and rare cells with concurrent high expression were identified.notably rare cell types with strong emt and stemness signatures were identified within tnbc tumours (fig 4b) which may lead to tumour progression and metastasis.]
Patterns of correlation between aggressive cancer gene expression signatures in different single cells, with rare cells showing high expression of multiple signatures.

Text 160
10.1038/ncomms15081
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 3 | removal of non-carcinoma cells reveals intrinsic tumour cell heterogeneity. (a) centred correlation matrix for all single cells demonstrates low cell-to-cell correlations (pearson’s r) in tumours with lymph node metastases (left). after separation of carcinoma and non-carcinoma cells, cell-to-cell correlations within the same tumour group are increased (right). each row and column represents single cells. in the colour panel on the far left side, grey represents tumour and light blue represents non-tumour cells. (b) intratumoral correlations before (white boxes) and after (striped boxes) the removal of non-carcinoma cells (left). each box shows the median and interquartile range (iqr 25th–75th percentiles), whiskers indicate the highest and lowest value within 1.5 times the iqr and outliers are marked as dots. samples were ranked by mean value of cell-to-cell pearson’s correlation coefficient (right). (c) unsupervised pca on the transcriptome separating patient-specific tumour groups for only tumour cells.']. Reference sentences:[the chromosomal gene expression pattern in carcinoma clusters largely recapitulated the genomic cnv profiles (supplementary fig 3).analysis of the cell-to-cell correlations for gene expression of the 515 cells demonstrated a relatively low degree of similarity between cells from the same patient (fig 3a).carcinoma cells from tnbc-type tumours (bc07–11) tend to show low cell-to-cell correlations with or without the removal of non-carcinoma cells (fig 3b) suggesting the contribution of both tumour intrinsic and microenvironmental properties to the intratumoural heterogeneity in tnbc.ultimately single-cell analysis revealed the distinct carcinoma characteristics of each patient tumour and diverse microenvironmental populations shared by different patient tumours (fig 3c).most carcinoma cells had gene expression characteristics consistent with the parental group after the removal of non-carcinoma cells (fig 3c).using single-cell rna-seq we confirmed the high level of transcriptome heterogeneity in tnbc tumour cells (fig 3b) which included signatures for basal immunomodula- tory luminal androgen receptor mesenchymal or stem-like gene expression (fig 5c).]
Intrinsic heterogeneity within tumour cells is revealed by increased cell-to-cell correlations after removing non-tumour cells.

Text 161
10.1038/ncomms15081
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 6 | identification of immune cell populations in the tumour microenvironment. (a) immune cell clusters were characterized by gene ontology terms. the cluster-specific genes extracted by lrt test (left) were associated with b cells, t cells or macrophages (mø), respectively (right). (b) immunoﬂuorescence staining (if) for cd3 or cd20 showing the infiltration of t or b lymphocytes in tumour tissues. scale bar, 20 mm. (c) immunoﬂuorescence staining results show significant correlations with gene expression in bulk tumour samples (pearson’s r, 0.66 for cd3 and 0.67 for cd20, po0.05). the linear regression result is drawn as a dashed line. number of captured single cells is marked with a colour key.']. Reference sentences:[we further classified these 175 immune cells into three groups (fig 6a) by non-negative factorization clustering with immune cell type- specific gene sets37 (supplementary figs 6 7a and supplementary table 3).the largest group expressed immunoglobulins and b-cell-specific transcriptional factors and many came from the tumour-infiltrating lymph nodes (cluster 1/b cells; fig 6a and supplementary table 4a).the second group expressed t-cell receptors and t-cell-specific markers most of which were captured from primary tumour tissues (cluster 2/t cells; fig 6a and supplementary table 4b).the third group also came from the primary tumour tissues and expressed markers for tissue macrophages (cluster 3/macrophages; fig 6a and supplementary table 4c).the presence of tumour-infiltrating t and b lymphocytes was also assessed by immunostaining in tumour tissues with anti-cd3 (d þ g þ e) or anti-cd20 antibodies (fig 6b) which showed significant correlations with gene expression in the bulk tumour samples (po0.05; fig 6c).the selected genes were significantly enriched for genes involved in inﬂammation and defence mechanisms (fig 6a).]
Patterns of immune cell populations (B cells, T cells, macrophages) in tumor microenvironment, correlated with gene expression in bulk samples.

Text 162
10.1016/j.stem.2017.04.003
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 5. coordinated transcription factor networks associated with lineage progression (a and b) heatmaps of the top differentially expressed (de) genes for the neuronal (a) and sustentacular cell (b) lineages. (c and d) connectivity graphs of the most correlated de transcription factors for the neuronal (c) and sustentacular cell (d) lineages, colored by the cluster in which expression is highest; the size of each node indicates magnitude of expression. (e) connectivity graph for the neuronal lineage colored by rank across the clusters within the lineage. for each transcription factor, we computed the average expression in each cluster and color-coded the corresponding node to indicate the cluster with the highest average expression. see also figure s6 and table s3.']. Reference sentences:[in contrast only one network of transcription factors in the sustentacular cell lineage is identified using the same criteria figure 5.interestingly the ap1 transcription factors (karin et al. 1997)—previously demonstrated to regulate keratinocyte differ- entiation (eckert et al. 2013)—are enriched in the resting and transitional hbcs (figure 5; table s3) suggesting that similar transcriptional networks may be used to control differentiation in these two divergent epithelial stem cell niches.]
Summary: Correlated transcription factor networks associated with lineage progression, shown by differential gene expression heatmaps and connectivity graphs in neuronal and sustentacular cell lineages.

Text 163
10.1126/science.aam7511
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 2. single-cell rna sequencing identifies cell types in embryonic ens. (a) pca of 120 single-cell encc transcriptomes based on variable genes identified. biplots show the variance of gene expression in single cells and the direction of marker genes (vectors) projected onto pc1 and pc2. arrow tips indicate the correlation coefficient of the respective gene with the pcs. the gradient of gene marker expression is color coded (neuronal, orange; glial, blue), and the mean total marker gene expression is size coded on a log10 scale. the neurogenic lineage (mostly small orange and large magenta circles) forms a diffuse cluster emerging from the bulk of cells (mostly magenta and small blue circles within the ellipsoid) that includes bipotential progenitors and gliogenic precursors. the distribution of cells in the pca plot and most of the gene expression variance is reflected by the tubb3-erbb3 axis. (b) heat map of marker gene expression (color coded in increasing order: black, gray, yellow, white). shown are two clusters of marker genes [progenitor/neuronal (tubb3, elavl4, ret, and phox2b) and progenitor/glial (erbb3, sox10, fabp7, and plp1)] and three main cell clusters (c1 to c3). the color bar along the cell axis illustrates the expression gradient between neuronal and glial markers (neuronal, orange; glial, blue). the red box in c2b indicates high ret-expressing cells. (c) perspective plot of single-cell density as a function of expression levels of progenitor/neuronal (orange) and progenitor/glial (blue) markers. (d and e) genes correlated with tubb3 (orange) and erbb3 (blue) shown as bars sorted according to log-transformed p values as a measure of correlation strength. p values are from linear regression analysis against the marker genes.']. Reference sentences:[principal components analysis (pca) identified a relatively compact cluster of cells expressing markers of undifferentiated ens progenitors or glia (sox10 erbb3 fabp7 plp1) (13–15) (fig 2a).this group extended into a diffuse cell popula- tion marked by expression of the neuron-specific genes tubb3 and elavl4 (fig 2a).ret and phox2b which are activated in early ens progenitors but maintained specifically in enteric neurons (16) were also associated with this neurogenic trajec- tory (fig 2a).hierarchical clustering of encc transcriptomes highlighted the close relationship between sox10/ erbb3 and fabp7/plp1 genes and subdivided the encc population into three clusters (fig 2b).cluster 1 (c1) cells expressed the neuronal markers tubb3 and elavl4 (but were negative for the progenitor/gliogenic module) (fig 2 b and c) research lasrado et al. science 356 722–726 (2017) 19 may 2017 1 of 5 1the francis crick institute 1 midland road london nw1 1at uk.the c2 cluster was further subdivided into c2a cells which coexpressed the progenitor/ neurogenic and progenitor/gliogenic modules and c2b cells which expressed the progenitor/ gliogenic markers but were generally negative for tubb3 and elavl4 (fig 2 b and c).the “mixed identity” and broad distribution of c2a cells across divergent cellular states (large magenta circles in fig 2a) suggested that they correspond to an early transient stage of the neurogenic lin- eage and that together with c1 cells they repre- sent distinct stages of n precursor trajectory.the remaining cell population of the c2 cluster (c2b) is likely to include uncommitted (ng) progenitors and glia-committed (g) precursors (fig 2 b and c).our analysis also identified a small cell cluster (c3) that expressed low levels of all markers used (fig 2 b and c).next we evaluated gene correlation by linear regression analysis against the marker genes tubb3 and erbb3 whose vectors define the main axis of pca plot variation (fig 2a).identified genes encode neuron-specific components of the ens (chrna3 chrnb4 gap43 scg3 syt4) (18) or have been implicated in ens development (nid1) (19) neurogenesis (heyl) (20) or gliogenesis (nfia) (21) (fig 2d).therefore lasrado et al. science 356 722–726 (2017) 19 may 2017 3 of 5 fig 2.]
Patterns related to correlation between marker genes and principal components in single-cell transcriptomes of embryonic enteric nervous system cells were identified. The distribution of cells and gene expression variance was reflected by the tubb3-erbb3 axis.

Text 164
10.1016/j.cell.2017.05.035
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure s6. the profile of tcr usage in hcc-related t cells, related to figure 5 (a) the distribution of abundance of tcr a- or b-chain expressed in single t cells. the gray lines represent the fitting values. (b) bar plots showing the number of cells expressing unique or dual tcr alleles of a- and b-chains. (c) the correlation between the degree of recurrent usage of various tcr a chains with that of b-chains among t cells. each dot represents a group of tcr alpha/ beta allele expressed in a given number of cells. dot size represents the proportion of such group in all tcr chains detected. (d) bar plots show usage of expressed v- and j- alleles of tcr beta chain in all t cells. (e) bar plots show usage of expressed v- and j- alleles of tcr alpha chain in all t cells. (f) tcr distribution of cd8+ t cells from different locations in patient p1116. each column represents an individual cell, and each row represents a distinct tcr type. most cells have unique tcr sequences, but some cells showed identical tcrs (multiple cells in one row, marked with black color). (g) the proportions of clonal tcrs of cd8+ t cells in different locations and patients. p < 0.01, student’s t test. p: peripheral blood; n: adjacent normal tissue; t: tumor tissue. error bars represent ± sem. (h) tcr distribution in tregs from different tissues in patient p0322.']. Reference sentences:[]
Summary: Correlation between recurrent usage of TCR alpha and beta chains in single T cells, with unique or dual TCR alleles expressed.

Text 165
10.1016/j.cell.2017.06.016
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure s4. single-cell rna-seq of mononuclear phagocytes, related to figure 4 (a) t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding (tsne) from figure 4a colored by percent alignment to the human transcriptome and number of genes detected per single cell. (b) distinct expression of il3ra (cd123) transcripts in bdca3 + pdc, cdc and monocytes. (c) correlation of down regulated gene score in the 227-signature of a single cell and the ifng gene signature of the same cell (matched) or the average of the other single cells from the same population (unmatched). the matched correlation is higher than the unmatched correlation for every population (p value < 0.001, paired t test). (d) correlation of the down regulated gene score in the 227-gene signature and ifng gene signatures between in silico ‘‘bulk’’ averages of each population. the downregulated gene score of the 227-gene signature and ifng signature of each population is most correlated with its own ifng signature and 227-gene signature respectively (p value < 0.00005; welch’s t test).']. Reference sentences:[]
Summary: Correlation patterns between gene signatures within single cells and bulk averages across different cell populations.

Text 166
10.1016/j.cell.2017.06.016
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 4. single-cell rna-seq reveals 227 programming in mononuclear phagocytes and close per-cell and population-based correlation between 227 homeostatic programming and ifng (a) transcriptomes of 333 bdca1+ dc, bdca3+ dc, and monocytes from a patient with melanoma visualized by tsne. differential gene expression between two annotated bdca3+ dendritic cell clusters (table s7a) shows that they are pdc-like and cdcs. (b) heatmaps representing relative single-cell expression of the up (left) and downregulated (right) genes that comprise the 227 signature annotated by single-cell populations previously assayed (tirosh et al., 2016), along with additional populations of monocytes and dc examined here. genes with expression fold change greater than 1.5 in at least two of four populations are annotated below the heatmaps: monocyte, bdca1+ dc, bdca3+ pdc, and bdca3+ cdc. (c) correlation of the upregulated gene score in the 227-signature of a single cell and the ifng gene signature of the same cell (matched) or the average of the other single cells from within the same population (unmatched). the matched correlation is higher than the unmatched correlation for every population (p value < 0.001, paired t test). (d) correlation of the upregulated gene score in the 227-gene signature and ifng gene signatures between in silico ‘‘bulk’’ averages of each population. the upregulated gene score of the 227-gene signature and ifng signature of each population is most correlated with its own ifng signature and 227-gene signature, respectively (p value < 0.003; welch’s t test). see also figure s4.']. Reference sentences:[a subset of genes from both of the 227 up and downregulated modules (figure 4b) was regulated among mononuclear phagocytes.to test the corre- lation of the 227 and ifng signatures between populations we generated 100 in silico bulk signatures from 40 random subsets of cells from each population and calculated the correlation between the 227 and ifng signatures (figure 4d and s4d).single-cell rna-seq of mononuclear phagocytes related to figure 4 (a) t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding (tsne) from figure 4a colored by percent alignment to the human transcriptome and number of genes detected per single cell.]
Correlation between 227-gene signature and IFNG gene signature within and between single-cell populations.

Text 167
10.1016/j.cmet.2017.05.018
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 7. circulating il6ra+ nk cells are detectable in obese humans and correlate with markers of metaﬂammation nk cells defined as viable, single, lineagenegative (cd3àcd14àcd19à) cd56+ cells were analyzed in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (pbmc) of lean (ctrl.) and obese humans by ﬂow cytometry. (a) representative ﬂow-cytometry dot plots of classical cd56bright and cd56dim nk cell subpopulations in a control and an obese individual. quantification of cd56bright and cd56dim nk cell subpopulations within the entire study cohort (ctrl. n = 16; obese n = 14). (b) analysis of il6ra expression in cd3à cd56+ nk cells exemplarily shown in a control and an obese individual. quantification of il6ra expression as median ﬂuorescence intensity (mfi) in cd3àcd56+ nk cells. (c) relative numbers of il6ra+ nk cells (as a percentage of cd3àcd56+ cells). (d–f) clinical data and blood samples from obese (n = 14) and lean (n = 16) subjects were prospectively collected and comprised (d) the body mass index, (e) the homeostatic model assessment of insulin resistance (homa-ir) as a measure of insulin sensitivity, and (f) plasma concentrations of high-sensitivity c-reactive protein (hscrp) as a measure of systemic low-grade inﬂammation. (g) linear regression analysis of hscrp levels and the number of circulating il6ra+ nk cells in each lean and obese individual. (h) unsupervised hierarchical gene expression cluster analysis of purified il6ra+ and il6raà nk cells of lean (n = 3) or obese (n = 4) humans. statistical analysis in (a) to (f) by unpaired twosided t test: ns, not significant; p % 0.05, p % 0.001. whisker-and-box plots show minimum to maximum, with the mean indicated by a plus sign. statistical analysis in (g) by linear regression analysis: best fit model, solid line; 95% confidence interval, dashed lines.']. Reference sentences:[analysis of cd3=cd56+ nk cell sub- sets based on cd56 bright or dim expression levels revealed no differences in circulation between lean and obese human subjects (figure 7a).in line with our observations in mice increased numbers of il6ra+ nk cells significantly correlated with higher levels of hscrp as a marker of metaﬂammation (figure 7g).unsupervised hierarchical cluster anal- ysis of differentially expressed genes allowed for separation of gene expression signatures between il6ra+ nk cells irrespec- tive of body weight (figure 7h).(2015) figure 7.]
Patterns related to correlation between il6ra+ nk cells and markers of metaflammation in lean and obese humans.

Text 168
10.1016/j.celrep.2017.07.009
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 3. transcriptional noise across each developmental stage (a) cartoon illustrating the concept used to calculate transcriptional noise. the method is based on cell-cell correlations within homogeneous populations. (b) plot showing transcriptional noise across all stages of epiblast development and the primitive streak (ps). (c) plot showing transcriptional noise of cell-cycle genes across all stages of epiblast development and the primitive streak (ps). (d) separation of cells at each stage or lineage by cell-cycle phase. number of cells at each cell-cycle stage is shown in the inset.']. Reference sentences:[by contrast when noise levels decrease cells tend to be more similar to each other and d de- creases (figure 3a).the results suggest that transcriptional noise is higher (p < 0.0001) in the uncommitted icm at e3.5 than in the committed epiblast at e4.5 (figure 3b).to further investigate this we as- signedacell-cyclestagetoeachcell(scialdoneetal.2015)which revealed a mixture of cell-cycle stages in embryos from e3.5 to e5.5 with a high proportion of cells in the g1 phase (figure 3d).at e4.5 figure 3.exit from pluripotency and lineage commitment the transition from e5.5 to e6.5 is characterized by increased transcriptional noise in the uncommitted epiblast portion along with a striking decrease in noise within the primitive streak (figure 3b).]
Summary: Correlation between transcriptional noise and cell-cycle stages during development, with higher noise in uncommitted cells and lower noise in committed cells.

Text 169
10.1016/j.celrep.2017.07.009
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 2. dynamics of x chromosome reactivation and silencing (a) ratio of gene expression (median) between female and male embryos for the x chromosome and chromosomes 1, 4, and 6. (b) total expression levels of the x chromosome visualized at a single-cell level. the y axis represents the proportion of x chromosome counts relative to all other chromosomes. (c) overall x chromosome expression levels plotted across all stages. the matched expression levels for pou5f1, nanog, and sox2 are also plotted underneath. (d) plot representing pluripotency genes correlating or anticorrelating with x chromosome expression at each stage. spearman’s correlation coefficient is represented by color and size. (e) plot representing selected genes correlating or anticorrelating with x chromosome expression at each stage. the x represents absence of expression.']. Reference sentences:[comparison of gene expression ratios between males and females from the x chromosome and auto- somes reveals increased x chromosome expression in females starting at e3.5 (figure 2a).analysis of x chromosome expression relative to auto- somes at the single-cell level reveals the heterogeneous nature of this process within a given stage (figure 2b).additionally figure 2.consistent with this we found (figure 2c) that x chromosome reactivation is positively correlated with pou5f1 expression levels at e3.5 (spearman correlation = 0.45) albeit the result is not significant after correcting for mul- tiple testing (table s3).]
Patterns of correlation between X chromosome expression and pluripotency genes at different stages in single cells.

Text 170
10.1038/s41467-017-00319-8
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 1 single nuclear rna-seq reveals cm heterogeneity. a, b core cardiac genes that are most highly expressed in every cm nucleus (a) exhibit high expression with low coefficient of variation (b). c highly expressed genes in tac nuclei have higher penetrance than highly expressed genes in sham nuclei. spearman’s rank correlation (r = 0.90, p < 2.2e−16) shows good correlation between average expression level and penetrance. d density distribution of correlation shows higher correlation in tac nuclei than in sham nuclei. p < 2.2e−16 from mann–whitney u test. e, f unsupervised hierarchical clustering e and pca f of single nuclear rna-seq of cm reveal that cm nuclei accurately segregate into clusters specific to sham or tac subgroups (subgroup a, b)']. Reference sentences:[pcm1 is an established marker of cm nuclei3 18 19 (supplementary fig 1a b).correlations showed good agreement of single nuclear expression with matched experimental pooled cm nuclei (r = 0.83 sham r = 0.86 tac supplementary fig 1d g) matched in silico pooled cm nuclei (r = 0.94 sham r = 0.98 tac supplementary fig 1c f) and even with matched bulk left ventricles (r = 0.61 sham r = 0.68 tac supplementary fig 1e h) which contain cm as well as other cell types such as fibroblasts and endothelial cells.in all cases correlation values plateaued once we had sampled ~30 nuclei (supplementary fig 1k–l) similar to saturation observed in previous single-cell rna-seq reports20–24 demonstrating that our chosen sample size had sufficiently exceeded this saturation limit.we identified 6 “core genes” that were the most highly expressed in every sham nucleus and also in healthy unoperated nuclei with low coefficient of variation (cov; fig 1a b).in general highly expressed genes were expressed in the vast majority of samples (spearman ranked correlation r = 0.90 p < 2.2e−16) but we noted that this observation was more so in tac than in sham (fig 1c).furthermore by using either unsupervised hierarchical clustering principal component analysis (pca) or ranked spearman’s correlation we consistently detected two distinct large subgroups of nuclei in sham and tac respectively replicated in a further set of biological repeats (fig 1e–g).]
Patterns of gene expression correlation in cardiac myocyte nuclei segregate into distinct subgroups related to cardiac conditions.

Text 171
10.1126/science.aam8940
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 5. cell type–specific expression profiles from sci-rna-seq enable the deconvolution of whole-animal transcription factor chip-seq data. for each of 27 cell types, a regularized regression model was fit to predict log-transformed gene expression levels in that cell type on the basis of chip-seq peaks in gene promoters (28). the chip-seq data were generated by the modencode (41) and modern (42) consortia, profiling transcription factor binding in whole c. elegans animals. “em” next to a tf label indicates that the chip-seq data for the tf are from an embryonic stage; “pe” indicates that the data are from a postembryonic stage. colors in the heat map show the extent to which having a chip-seq peak for a given tf in a gene promoter correlates with increased expression in a given cell type. peaks in “hot” regions (28) are excluded. gray cells in the heat map correspond to cases where a tf is not expressed in a cell type (<10 tpm), in which case chip-seq data for that tf are not considered by the regression model.']. Reference sentences:[for each of 27 cell types we constructed regularized regression models to predict each gene’s expression as a function of the tf chip peaks present in its promoter (fig 5).we re- stricted a cell type’s model to those tfs that cao et al. science 357 661–667 (2017) 18 august 2017 6 of 7 fig 5.]
Summary: Correlation between TF chip-seq peaks in gene promoters and gene expression levels across 27 cell types.

Text 172
10.1038/nmeth.4407
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 1 | dronc-seq: massively parallel snuc-seq. (a) dronc-seq of adult frozen mouse hippocampus and prefrontal cortex. a tsne plot of 13,133 dronc-seq nuclei profiles (>10,000 reads and >200 genes per nucleus) from hippocampus (hip; 4 samples) and prefrontal cortex (pfc; 4 samples). nuclei (dots) are colored by cluster membership and labeled post hoc according to cell type and anatomical distinctions. expfc, glutamatergic neurons from the pfc; gaba, gabaergic interneurons; exca1/3, pyramidal neurons from the hip ca region; exdg, granule neurons from the hip dentate gyrus region; asc, astrocytes; mg, microglia; odc, oligodendrocytes; opc, oligodendrocyte precursor cells; nsc, neuronal stem cells; smc, smooth muscle cells; end, endothelial cells. clusters are grouped by cell type as in supplementary figure 3a. flagged clusters (supplementary fig 3b and supplementary table 3, online methods) were removed. (b) cell-type signatures. the average expression of differentially expressed signature genes (rows, online methods) in each dronc-seq mouse brain cell subset (columns). (c) dronc-seq cell-type expression signatures in the mouse brain agree with previous studies. pairwise correlations of the average expression (online methods) for the genes in each cell-type signature defined by dronc-seq and cell types defined by snuc-seq in the hippocampus3 (left) and scrna-seq in the visual cortex17 (right). (d) subsets of mouse gabaergic neurons. tsne embedding of 816 dronc-seq nuclei profiles from the gabaergic neurons cluster (clusters 10 and 11 in a; inset, blue), color coded by subcluster membership. (e,f) congruence of gabaergic neurons subclusters defined here (from d) with subsets defined from nuclei profiles in the mouse hippocampus3 (e) and single-cell profiles in the mouse visual cortex17 (f). dot plot shows the proportion of cells in each cluster defined by the other two data sets that were classified to each dronc-seq cluster using a multiclass random forest classifier (as in ref. 11, online methods) trained on the dronc-seq subclusters.']. Reference sentences:[here we develop dronc-seq (supplementary fig 1a) a mas- sively parallel single-nucleus rna-seq method that combines the advantages of snuc-seq and drop-seq to profile nuclei at low cost and high throughput.we modified drop-seq7 to accommodate the lower amount of rna in nuclei compared to cells including a modified microfluidic design and changes in the nuclei isola- tion protocol (supplementary fig 1 supplementary table 1 supplementary data 1 and online methods).clustering of 13313 nuclei profiled from frozen adult mouse hippocampus (n = 4 mice) and prefrontal cortex (pfc n = 4) (sequenced at low depth of >10000 reads and >200 genes detected per nucleus) with an average of 1810 genes in neu- rons and 1077 in non-neuronal cells (online methods) revealed groups of nuclei corresponding to known cell types (for example gabaergic neurons) and to anatomically distinct brain regions or subregions (for example ca1 and ca3 within the hippocam- pus; fig 1a supplementary fig 3 and 4 and supplementary table 3).each had a distinct expression signature (fig 1b and supplementary table 4) and was supported by nuclei from all mice (supplementary fig 5a).gabaergic neurons of the same class but from different brain regions (and different samples) grouped together as did non-neuronal cells (fig 1b supplementary fig 3e and 5).among non-neuronal cells different glial cell types including astrocytes microglia oli- godendrocytes and oligodendrocyte precursor cells readily par- titioned into separate clusters (fig 1a) despite their relatively low rna levels and correspondingly lower numbers of detected genes (supplementary fig 5cd).finally despite the lower number of genes detected per nucleus in this setting the cell types and their signatures from dronc-seq were comparable to those obtained previously with snuc-seq of mouse hippocampus3 and scrna-seq of the visual cortex17 (fig 1c and online methods).for example we distinguished eight subsets of gabaergic neurons (fig 1d and supplementary fig 6ab) each expressing a unique combination of canonical marker genes and signatures (supplementary fig 6cd and supplementary table 5).nuclei are color-coded by cluster membership and clusters are labeled post-hoc (abbreviations as in fig 1a).dot plot shows the proportion of cells in each cluster defined by the other two data sets that were classified to each dronc-seq cluster (as in fig 1ef).958 | vol.14 no.10 | october 2017 | nature methods brief communications random forest classifier11 on the dronc-seq gabaergic subclus- ters and used it to map gabaergic neuronal cells17 or nuclei3 from other data sets (fig 1ef and online methods).despite the different brain regions and experimental methods and the lower number of genes detected the dronc-seq subclusters mapped nearly one-to-one with subclusters defined by snuc-seq3 in hip- pocampus and matched satisfactorily to sets of fine-resolution subclusters defined by scrna-seq of the visual cortex17 (fig 1ef and supplementary fig 6).417) (supplementary fig 9 supplementary table 9) and subtypes of gabaergic neurons (fig 2f and supplementary fig 10a–c) each associated with a distinct combination of canonical markers and signatures (fig 2g supplementary fig 10de and supplementary table 9) as previously reported341719.human gabaergic subclusters mapped well to previously defined clusters in the mouse hippocampus3 (snuc-seq fig 2h) mouse visual cortex17 (scrna-seq fig 2i) and human cortex4 (snuc-seq supplementary fig 11) with the same assignment of canonical marker genes to each cluster (for example pvalb sst and vip; supplementary table 9) despite the different species experimental methods and brain regions used in each study as well as the lower number of genes detected in dronc-seq.the device design is provided in supplementary data 1 and supplementary figure 1b.to validate dronc-seq for fixed tissue (supplementary fig 1f) subregions were placed in ice-cold rnalater (thermofisher scientific cat # am7020) and stored at 4 °c overnight after which rnalater was removed and samples were stored at −80 °c until processing.for comparison experiments of nuclei isolation protocols (supplementary fig 1de) nuclei were also isolated using the sucrose gradient centrifugation method described for snuc-seq3.we tested bead and cell loading at this and other concentrations using species-mixing experiments7 (for example supplementary fig 1g and supplementary table 1) and ease of bead flow as metrics and found that beads at 350000/ml and nuclei at 300000/ml concentrations performed best in terms of low human–mouse doublet rate and fewer clogging events during droplet generation.for nuclei experiments on human and mouse tissue 75-µm dronc-seq devices were used except for when a 125-µm drop- seq device was used for comparison (supplementary fig 1c).for the quality-control experiments (specifically testing the performance with rnalater different nuclei isolation protocols and different microfluidic devices; supplementary fig 1) at least 20000 usable reads per nucleus © 2017 nature america inc. part of springer nature.]
Summary: Correlation patterns of cell-type expression signatures in mouse brain regions and across different datasets were analyzed using dronc-seq.

Text 173
10.1038/nmeth.4407
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 2 | dronc-seq distinguishes cell types and signatures in adult post-mortem human brain tissue. (a) cell-type clusters. tsne embedding of 14,963 dronc-seq nuclei profiles (each with >10,000 reads and >200 genes) from adult frozen human hippocampus (hip, 4 samples) and prefrontal cortex (pfc, 3 samples) from five donors. nuclei are color-coded by cluster membership and clusters are labeled post-hoc (abbreviations as in fig 1a). (b) marker genes. plots are as in a but with nuclei colored according to the expression level of known cell-type marker genes. (slc17a7, excitatory neurons; gad1, gabaergic neurons; ppfia2, exdg; slc1a2, asc; mbp, odc; pdgfra, opc). (c) fraction of nuclei from each brain region associated with each cell type. cell types are defined as in supplementary figure 7a and sorted from left by types enriched in pfc versus hip. (d) cell-type expression signatures. the average expression of differentially expressed signature genes (online methods, rows) in each dronc-seq human brain cell subset (columns; defined as in supplementary fig 7a). (e) dronc-seq cell-type expression signatures in the human brain agree with previous mouse data sets. pairwise correlations of the average expression (online methods) for the genes in each cell-type signature defined by dronc-seq (rows), cell types defined by snuc-seq in the mouse hippocampus3 (left, columns), and scrna-seq in the visual cortex17 (right, columns). (f–i) gabaergic neurons subclusters. (f) tsne embedding of 1,500 dronc-seq nuclei profiles from the gabaergic neurons cluster (clusters 5 and 6 in fig 2a; inset), color coded by subcluster membership. (g) average expression of canonical gabaergic marker genes (rows) in each of the nuclei subclusters (columns) defined in f. (h,i) mapping of human gabaergic neurons subcluster defined here (columns, from f) to subsets defined from nuclei profiles in the mouse hippocampus3 (h) and single-cell profiles in the mouse visual cortex17 (i; rows). dot plot shows the proportion of cells in each cluster defined by the other two data sets that were classified to each dronc-seq cluster (as in fig 1e,f).']. Reference sentences:[dronc- seq (for samples sequenced at 160000 reads per nucleus online methods) detected on average 3295 genes (4643 transcripts) for 3t3 nuclei 2731 genes (3653 transcripts) for mouse brain and 1683 genes (2187 transcripts) for human brain (supplementary fig 2).using down sampling we estimate that 19000–26000 transcriptome-mapped reads per nucleus are required for satura- tion (supplementary fig 2fg).both methods yielded high- quality libraries detecting an average of 5134 and 3295 genes for cells and nuclei respectively (supplementary fig 2bc).the average expression profile of single nuclei correlated well with that of single cells (pearson r = 0.87 supplementary fig 2d).in both methods over 84% of reads align to the genome (in a representative example) but in cells 75.2% of these genomic reads map to exons and 9.1% map to introns whereas in nuclei 46.2% of genomic reads map to exons and 41.8% to introns (supplementary fig 2e) thus reflecting the enrichment of nascent transcripts in the nucleus313–16.(f) tsne embedding of 1500 dronc-seq nuclei profiles from the gabaergic neurons cluster (clusters 5 and 6 in fig 2a; inset) color coded by subcluster membership.our analysis of 14963 low-depth sequenced nuclei (>10000 reads per nucleus with an average of 1238 genes in neu- rons and 607 in non-neuronal cells; fig 2a–d and supplementary fig 7) revealed distinct clusters corresponding to known cell types (fig 2a supplementary fig 7a and supplementary table 7).by analyzing a large number of cells we were able to recover rare cell types such as that in cluster 14 (fig 2a) a cluster of hippocampal cells probably comprised of neural stem cells based on marker gene expression (supplementary fig 7f).the cell-type-specific gene signatures we determined for each human cell-type cluster (fig 2d supplementary table 8) agreed well with previously defined signatures in mouse hippocampus3 and cortex17 (fig 2e) and highlighted specific pathways (supplementary fig 7e).417) (supplementary fig 9 supplementary table 9) and subtypes of gabaergic neurons (fig 2f and supplementary fig 10a–c) each associated with a distinct combination of canonical markers and signatures (fig 2g supplementary fig 10de and supplementary table 9) as previously reported341719.human gabaergic subclusters mapped well to previously defined clusters in the mouse hippocampus3 (snuc-seq fig 2h) mouse visual cortex17 (scrna-seq fig 2i) and human cortex4 (snuc-seq supplementary fig 11) with the same assignment of canonical marker genes to each cluster (for example pvalb sst and vip; supplementary table 9) despite the different species experimental methods and brain regions used in each study as well as the lower number of genes detected in dronc-seq.doi:10.1038/nmeth.4407 nature methods were required (the number of reads at which we estimated sample saturation; supplementary fig 2fg).(2) we compared the means and the distribu- tions of the number of genes and transcripts detected for all cells and nuclei that pass our quality filter (supplementary fig 2bc).= 0.0024) (supplementary fig 2d).(5) we compared the fraction of the total number of reads that were mapped to (i) coding regions (ii) utrs (iii) intronic regions (iv) intergenic regions and (v) ribosomal rna (as described above) (supplementary fig 2e).we used k = 100 for clustering of each full data set and k = 80 for the human brain subset clustering (fig 2f supplementary fig 89).]
Patterns related to correlation in cell-type expression signatures across different brain regions and species were analyzed using dronc-seq data.

Text 174
10.1038/nbt.3973
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['[\'figure 1 benchmarking of reap-seq on pbmcs. (a) pbmcs (n = 7,271) were processed with reap-seq. t-sne visualization of eight clusters identified\', \'using the top ten significant principal components across 1,664 variable genes. cells are colored by cluster. (b) mrna and protein signal for canonical\', \'markers expressed in monocytes (cd11b, cd33, cd14, cd155), b cells (cd19, cd20), t cells (cd3, cd4, cd8), and nk cells (cd56, cd158e1) were\', \'projected on the t-sne plot from a. for each marker, the pearson correlation coefficient (r) between mrna and protein expression across 7,271 single cells\', \'is displayed. (c) flow cytometry staining confirms that cd14+ monocytes have low level of cd4+ expression, which was seen in the reap-seq t-sne plot\', \'showing cd4 protein expression (b, upper left cluster in cd4 protein panel). (d) mrna signal for markers expressed in plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pdcs;\', \'lilra4, serpinf1), fcgr3a+ monocytes (fcgr3a), and megakaryocytes (pf4) were projected on the t-sne plot from a. (e) reap-seq conducted on\', \'7,271 pbmcs compared to flow cytometry on 290,750 pbmcs (from the same sample). reap-seq protein counts were log normalized, first scaling each cell\', \'to a total of 1 × 104 molecules and then analyzed in cytobank along with flow cytometry data. (f) reap-seq protein assay enables measurement of cd45ro\', "and cd45ra isoforms that cannot be measured with 3\' rna-seq methods. flow cytometry data confirmed the high expression of cd45ra in cd20+ cells and", \'cd45ro in cd14+ cells. the color of each dot in the bivariate plot represents the level of cd45ra and cd45ro expression. yellow indicates high expression\', \'and dark red indicates low expression.\']. Reference sentences:[to initially test reap-seq we stained peripheral blood mononuclear cells (pbmcs) with a mixture of 45 abbs (fig 1 and supplementary tables 1 and 2) and then magnetically enriched for three popula- tions of cells: cd3+ t cells cd11b+ myeloid cells and cd19+ b cells (supplementary fig 7).we used the nonlin- ear dimensionality reduction method ‘t-distributed stochastic neigh- bor embedding’ (t-sne) to visualize the principal component analysis (pca)-reduced data set in two-dimensional space13 where the cells were color-coded by cluster (fig 1a and supplementary fig 7a).protein and mrna expression of canonical markers for monocytes (cd11b cd14 cd33) b cells (cd20 cd19) t cells (cd3 cd4 cd8) and natural killer (nk) cells (cd56 cd158e1) were projected on the mrna t-sne plot to visualize expression across all pbmcs and to assess the specificity and sensitivity of the protein and mrna assays (fig 1b).in addition to the unique 8-bp barcode the antibody dna label consists of a poly (da) sequence for priming to the cell barcode and a universal sequence for amplification (supplementary fig 1–3 and supplementary discussion).2 advance online publication nature biotechnology binding of the cd4 abb (fig 1c).however measuring the entire transcriptome enabled us to identify plasmacytoid dendritic cells (lilra4 serpinf1) megakaryoctyes (pf4) and fcgr3a+ monocytes (fcgr3a) as these markers were not included in our abb panel (fig 1d).we compared reap-seq protein measurements to flow cytometry and found agreement in the relative abundances of the four major cell types identified (fig 1e).reap-seq protein measurements of cd45ro and cd45ra (alternatively spliced isoforms of cd45) were also consistent with flow cytometry data showing high cd45ra expression in cd20+ b cells and high cd45ro expression in cd14+ monocytes (fig 1f).naive cd8+ t cells from the blood of three individual donors were treated with either anti-cd3 (acd3) and anti-cd28 (acd28) antibodies or acd27 acd3 and acd28 antibod- ies (supplementary fig 10a) and labeled with a panel of 80 abbs (supplementary table 1).for each donor the acd27-treated and untreated samples were merged into a digital gene or protein expression matrix and unsupervised clustering was performed (supplementary fig 10b).cells were color-coded by the different treatment conditions to visualize co-localization of cells within the t-sne plots (fig 2a and supplementary fig 11).when mrna was clustered using the smaller set of protein markers there was no visual separation between acd27-treated and untreated cells in donors 2 and 3 (supplementary fig 11b).4 advance online publication nature biotechnology as those having adjusted p-values < 0.01 and fold changes > 1.3 (supplementary fig 12 and supplementary discussion).among all three donors there were 74 overlapping differentially expressed genes (fig 2b and supplementary fig 13).reap-seq protein analysis identified 16 differentially expressed pro- teins overlapping across the three donors (fig 2c and supplementary fig 14 and 15a) when cells were treated with acd27.interleukin (il)-7r was consistently downregulated at both the protein and mrna level (supplementary fig 16 17 and 18a) and there was a decrease in cd27 expression which was confirmed by flow cytometry (supplementary fig 19).also we found that a substantial num- ber of cd8+ t cells treated with acd27 cells expressed cd4 and cd25 a finding we confirmed by flow cytometry (supplementary fig 14b 18b and 20).the levels of mrna and protein did not always correlate (supplementary fig 16 and 21) and protein quantification was more sensitive for markers with lower-abundance mrna transcripts such as icos.the t-sne plots were generated to visualize the clusters (fig 2a and supplementary fig 10b).to compare single- cell proteomic and transcriptomic expression we clustered mrna or protein data and then projected the mrna and protein single-cell expression data onto the preserved clustering structure in the t-sne plot (fig 1b and 2g and supplementary fig 7c and 18a).normalized enrichment scores (nes) and false-discovery rate (fdr) q-values were calculated for each donor (supplementary fig 17).antibodies anti-cd69 (fn50) anti-cd69 + dna barcode (fnf50) and mouse igg1 isotype control (mopc-21) were captured to ~130–160 ru on the active flowcells (fc-234) and the reference flowcell (fc-1) was left blank (supplementary fig 15c–e).all flow cytometry data shown were gated on live cells→singlets→pbmcs→cd14–/cd20-→cd3+ t cells (supplementary fig 19a).the gating strategy of t cells from rhesus is included in supplemental fig 19a.]
Summary: Correlation between mRNA and protein expression of canonical markers in single cells.

Text 175
10.1016/j.cell.2017.09.004
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure s5. transcriptional correlates of mutational signatures, related to figure 6 brain cells were ordered according to the fraction of mutations attributed to signature s2. (a) average age is higher in cells with high signature s2 load (p = 2.7e-3, n = 398. linear rank regression). line is loess fit +-.999 confidence interval. dots are running mean, k = 10.']. Reference sentences:[]
Summary: Correlation between mutational signature load and cell age in brain cells.

Text 176
10.1016/j.cell.2017.09.004
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 6. transcriptional correlates of mutational signatures endocrine pancreas cells were ordered according to the fraction of mutations attributed to signature s1. (a) average age is higher in cells with high s1 load (p = 5.95e-23, linear rank regression). points are running mean, k = 10, and line is loess fit, dotted lines indicate ± 0.999 confidence interval. (b) each gene was tested for association with signature s1 (linear rank regression), shown are the top genes by coefficient, with p < 1e-15 (fdr corrected). points are individual mrna measurements, line loess fit as in (a). (c) comparison of the top ten gene ontology (go) categories positively correlated with signature s1 and transcriptional noise. categories related to protein production, such as ribosomal proteins, recur in both. color scale indicates fdr-adjusted p value, winsorized at 10à6. see also table s5.']. Reference sentences:[mutational load of signature s1 is higher in endocrine cells from older donors and correlate with induction of protein synthesis-related genes ranking of cells by signature-specific mutational load indicated that signatures s1 and s2 were highly correlated with age with figure 6.the genes most highly associated with high s1 load were involved in transcription (tceb2) protein synthesis (rpl36) and modulation of ros (romo1) (figure 6b see also table s5 for an expanded list).gene set enrichment analysis (subramanian et al. 2005) indi- cated that pathways involved in protein synthesis were altered in both cells with high s1 load and cells with high transcriptional noise (figure 6c).transcriptional correlates of mutational signatures related to figure 6 brain cells were ordered according to the fraction of mutations attributed to signature s2.]
Summary: Correlation between mutational signature s1 load and age, gene expression related to protein synthesis, and gene ontology categories in endocrine pancreas cells.

Text 177
10.1016/j.cell.2017.09.004
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 1. a comprehensive survey of single cells sampled from human pancreas across different ages (a) tsne plot of 2,544 successful scrna-seq libraries from eight donors. each point represents one cell and points are positioned to retain pairwise distances as determined by pearson correlation of the 500 most highly expressed genes. cell identity is indicated by marker gene expression. (b) fraction of cells that express the aging associated gene cdkn2a (p16) in juvenile (0–6 years), young adult (21–22 years), and middle-aged (38–54 years) donors increases with age (p = 3.1e-3, n = 8, linear regression.) bars are mean ± sem (n = 2–3). (c) boxplot of transcriptional noise in b-cells, plotted by age group. higher age is associated with increased whole-transcriptome cell-to-cell variability within cell type (p = 6.67e-9, n = 384). boxes indicate the middle quartiles, separated by median line. whiskers indicate last values within 1.5 3 the interquartile range for the box. (d) violin plots show the ratio of insulin–glucagon protein staining at the sites of insulin (ins, n = 5,801) and glucagon (gcg, n = 3,254) rna hybridization spots. (e) boxplot of log2 counts per million (cpm) of cell-atypical glucagon transcript in b cells (left), and insulin transcripts in a-cells (right), in cells from juvenile (0–6 years), young adult (21–22 years) and middle-aged (38–54) donors. boxes indicate the middle quartiles, separated by median line. whiskers indicate last values within 1.5 3 the interquartile range for the box. see also figure s1 and tables s1, s2, and s3.']. Reference sentences:[dimensionality reduction analysis (tsne) of data from all donors led to consistent clustering of different cell types into distinct regions (figure 1a) indicating an absence of donor- or sequencing-related batch effects.both methods indicated increased transcriptional noise figure 1.scrna-seq revealed that the fraction of a- or b-cells co-expressing both insulin and glucagon mrna increased significantly with advancing age (figure 1e gcg in b-cells: p = 1.74e-27 n = 348; ins in a-cells: p = 5.38e-10 n = 998 linear regression).single-cell rna-seq of human pancreas related to figure 1 (a) tsne plot of cells from the major endocrine cell types.]
Correlation patterns in gene expression across different cell types and ages, with increased variability in older cells.

Text 178
10.1016/j.stem.2017.09.003
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 1. genomic profiling of human spermatogonial stem cells (a) schematic illustration of human adult male germline development and niche, depicting a small section of the seminiferous tubule. (b) experimental workﬂow in this study. sc, single cell; wgbs, whole-genome bisulfite sequencing. (c) expression profiles of selected key genes following the enrichment procedure with ssea4 (blue) or c-kit (red). browser snapshots of ddx4 (germ cell marker), fgfr3 (hssc marker), kit and sycp3 (differentiating spermatogonia marker), gata4 (sertoli cell marker), and lhcgr (leydig cell marker). the intron/exon (box) genomic structure of each gene is shown in black. (d) distribution of dname in human pgcs, hsscs, sperm, egg, icms (inner cell mass), escs, fc (frontal cortex), and liver. human pgc and liver methylation data are from guo et al. (2015); icm and fc methylation data are from guo et al. (2014a); egg methylation data are from okae et al. (2014); esc methylation data are from gifford et al. (2013). (e) hierarchical clustering of correlation of global dname in human pgcs, hsscs, sperm, egg, icms, escs, fc, and liver. see also figures s1 and s2.']. Reference sentences:[taken together we define the dynamic hssc chro- matin/transcriptional landscape in hsscs and delineate key a b c d e figure 1.results genomic profiling of ssea4+ hsscs and c-kit+ spermatogonia multiple lines of evidence support ssea4 as a marker of hsscs and c-kit as a marker of spermatogonia committing/committed to differentia- tion (izadyar et al. 2011; valli et al. 2014a) (figure 1a).both ssea4+ hsscs and subsequent c-kit+ spermatogonia reside within an intermediate compartment formed between the basal lamina and cell junctions formed by sertoli cells which allow migrating spermatocytes to pass to the adluminal compartment (figure 1a).to refine our understanding of how hsscs differen- tiate into spermatogonia we also performed scrna-seq in iso- lated ssea4+ and c-kit+ cells (figure 1b).second our transcriptome data showed the expected expression patterns of key markers from mouse and human studies: for example the germ cell marker (ddx4) was expressed in both ssea4+ and c-kit+ cells the self-renewal marker (fgfr3) was upregulated in ssea4+ hsscs differentiating markers (kit and sycp3) were upregu- lated in c-kit+ spermatogonia and known markers of sertoli cells (gata4) and leydig cells (lhcgr) were extremely low or absent (figure 1c).detected at low levels (figure 1c) raising the possibility that doubly positive cells might have been isolated during our enrich- ment/sorting procedure.]
Summary: Correlation patterns of gene expression in different cell types, including hsscs and spermatogonia, were analyzed using single-cell transcriptomics.

Text 179
10.1016/j.neuron.2017.09.026
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 3. astrocyte heterogeneity in the mea (a) two-dimensional tsne visualization of three astrocyte subclusters (as1, as2, and as3) in the mea. individual dots correspond to single cells, colored by astrocyte subtypes. (b) heatmap showing expression level of select top marker genes (fold change > 2, fdr < 0.05) of three astrocyte subclusters. (c) boxplots showing the distribution of expression level of representative common or subtype markers for astrocytes. (d) heatmap showing pearson correlation between astrocyte subtypes and the eigengenes of gene coexpression modules defined by wgcna in all astrocytes.']. Reference sentences:[using louvain-jaccard clus- tering we further divided the mea astrocytes into three distinct subclasses (figure 3a) which we refer to as as1 as2 and as3 hereinafter.for example nkx6-2 sfrp5 and luzp2 were selectively enriched in as1 while myoc cidea and gfap were selectively enriched in as3 (figure 3c).consistently wgcna performed on astrocytes identified one gene coexpression mod- ule (m1) significantly upregulated in as1 and one module (m2) strongly upregulated in as3 (figure 3d).top enriched gene 316 neuron 96 313–329 october 11 2017 ontology terms for m1 included cell adhesion rna processing nervous system development and sodium transport whereas m2 was enriched for genes implicated in regulation of apoptosis cell proliferation and cellular responses to stimuli (figure 3e) suggesting possible functional differences between the astro- cyte subpopulations.neuron 96 313–329 october 11 2017 317 a b c d e f g h i j k figure 3.as2 astrocytes which were also lcat+ appeared to be sparsely distributed in the parenchyma (figure 3h).gray dots astrocyte subtype markers shown in figure 3b.gray dots with blue circles common and key subtype markers for astrocytes shown in figure 3c.]
Summary: Correlation patterns between astrocyte subtypes and gene coexpression modules in single-cell transcriptomics data.

Text 180
10.1016/j.cell.2017.10.019
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure s7. combinatorial molecular codes of pn subtype identity, related to figure 7 (a) expression levels of genes in the minimal combinatorial codes for gh146+ pn subtype identity. each column is a cluster and each row is a gene. color indicates mean expression of the gene among the gh146+ cells within the cluster (cpm, counts per million). these plots correspond to figures 7c–7e before binarization. cells and genes are arranged by hierarchical clustering on binarized expression states (dendrograms shown in figures 7c–7e). (b) distribution of expression levels across all genes and all gh146+ cells. we chose to binarize expression levels using a cutoff of log2(cpm+1) = 3 (equivalent to cpm = 7) because this is a minimum of the distribution. (c) robustness of information content of genes to the choice of binary cutoff. we calculated the pearson correlation between the mutual information of a gene under various binarization cutoffs and the mutual information at the binarization cutoff that we used for analysis [log2(cpm+1) = 3]. for binarization cutoffs ranging from 2 to 6, the mutual information was highly similar (r > 0.95), indicating that the precise choice of binarization threshold does not affect our results.']. Reference sentences:[]
Summary: Correlation patterns of gene expression levels in specific cell clusters were analyzed, showing robustness to binarization cutoffs.

Text 181
10.1038/s41590-017-0001-2
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 4 | distinct transcriptional patterns of human cb hspc populations. a, hierarchical clustering of hspc populations (key) using all genes and 1,000 bootstrap permutation analyses, with height calculated as (1 – [correlation co-efficient]); numbers above dendrogram bars in plot indicate approximate unbiased p values (au). b, pca of cb hspcs with all genes (top left) or the 300, 3,000 or 10,000 most significant degs, ranked by anova p value (called, for example, ‘top 300 anova genes’ subsequently; above plots), or the 300 genes with the greatest variance in expression (300 variant; bottom right); numbers in parentheses along axes indicate the proportion of variance represented by pc1 and pc2. c, loadings plot showing the genes with the most extreme loadings scores for the pca run with the top 300 anova genes (left) or the 300 genes with the greatest variance in expression (right). d, expression (key; normalized per gene) of the top 300 anova genes (right margin; one per row) by hspc populations (columns), showing clusters with distinct expression patterns across hspc populations (yellow outlines); dendrograms (top and left margins) indicate hierarchical clustering (of columns and rows, respectively). e, number of degs (key; specific number in plot) in various comparisons of hspc populations (rows and columns). f,g, expression (as in d) of the 50 most significant degs, ranked by p value, in the lmpp, mlp and gmp gene signatures (above plots) (f), and of transcription-factor-encoding genes expressed differentially across hspc populations (g); asterisk colors indicate genes associated with the lymphoid lineage (orange) or myeloid lineage (green) or genes encoding products associated with immunological function (black). data are representative of three experiments with three donors (mpps) or four donors (all other cell populations).']. Reference sentences:[hierarchical clustering using all expressed genes separated lmpps and mlps from the other hspcs (fig 4a and supplementary fig 4a).hscs and mpps clustered away from mature progenitors in this analysis (fig 4a and supplementary fig 4a).we performed principal-component analysis (pca) using all expressed genes or between 300 and 10000 of the genes with the most significantly differential expression ('most significant degs'; ranked by anova p value) (fig 4b).the best separation of hspc populations on a pca plot was achieved with the 300 most significant degs (fig 4b).principal component 1 (pc1) separated hspcs by lineage potential and pc2 separated hspcs by maturation (fig 4b).by comparing the eigenvalues of the 300 most significant degs against those from a randomized data set we demonstrated that pc1–pc3 captured most of the variation between populations (supplementary fig 4bc).we also identified the genes with the greatest variance across all populations without assuming population identity (fig 4b and supplementary fig 4d).pca plotting using this gene set produced similar results (fig 4b and supplementary fig 4d).the loadings plot for the pca using the 300 most significant degs identified genes associated with stem cells (hlf mecom and nfib) lymphoid cells (igj irf8 and mme) and erythroid-megakaryocytic cells (hbd and hpgds) (fig 4c).hierarchical clustering using that same gene set separated hspc populations (fig 4d).gmps had the highest expression of elane mpo and prtn3 whereas lmpps and mlps shared expression of many lymphoid-cell-associated genes (for example il-7r lck syk ada hlx lst1 and itgal) (fig 4d).the most closely related popula- tions were hscs and mpps (only 13 degs separated these popula- tions) while lmpps and mlps were also closely related (85 degs) (fig 4e supplementary fig 4e and supplementary tables 5–11).gmps were most closely related to cmps (40 degs) but retained similarity to lmpps (183 degs) (fig 4e supplementary fig 4e and supplementary tables 5–11).articles nature immunology population comparisons filtered for uniquely expressed genes (fig 4f and supplementary table 12a–c).the gmp signature included many myeloid-cell-associated genes and the mlp signa- ture included many lymphoid-cell-associated genes (fig 4d).in con- trast the lmpp signature included both lymphoid-cell-associated genes (ets1 ebf1 and cytip) and myeloid-cell-associated genes (trpm2 s100a8 padi4 and alox15b) (fig 4f).gmps expressed genes associated with immature myeloid cells whereas lmpps and mlps expressed genes associated with b cells monocytes and dcs but not those associated with neutrophils (with the exception of fosb) (supplementary fig 4f).first we identified transcription factors expressed differentially by mlps relative to their expression by gmps (supplementary fig 4g).second we assessed the expres- sion of hemopoietic transcription factors identified previously35 (fig 4g).in both analyses gmps expressed mainly genes encod- ing myeloid-cell-associated transcription factors (for example erg gata2 myb and egr1) while lymphoid-cell-associated transcription factors (for example hes1 runx3 pou2f2 lef1 ikzf1 irf8 tcf4) had their highest expression in mlps (fig 4g and supplementary fig 4g).lmpps showed expression of both lymphoid-cell-associated transcription factors and myeloid- cell-associated transcription factors (fig 4g and supplementary fig 4g).a similar trend was seen for genes encoding cytokine and chemokine receptors (supplementary fig 4h).the sample size selection for each figure was the following: figure 1: sample sizes were: cfu assay 5 biological replicates; in vitro liquid culture 150 progenitor cells from 3 populations from 3 biological replicates; bulk t cell culture results 5 biological replicates figure 2: sample sizes were: lda studies used 4 biological replicates; single cell functional analyses in thesgf15/2 condition 22 biological replicates; single cell functional studies in the sf7b condition 3 biological replicates figure 3: sample sizes were: in vivo transplantation lmpp were isolated from 11 biological replicates mlp from 3 biological replicates gmp from 6 biological replicates figure 4: sample sizes were: rna sequencing of normal stem/progenitor populations from 3-4 biological replicates figure 5: sample sizes were: single cell rna seq gene expression analysis 2 biological replicates; figure 6: sample sizes were: lmpp revised sorting strategy 6 biological replicates (sgf15/2 condition) and 6 biological replicates (sf7b condition) figure 7: sample sizes were: gmp revised sorting strategy 4 biological replicates.in figure 4: rna-seq data from one biological replicate of an mpp population was excluded when compared to the 3 remaining mpp biological replicates as its global gene expression showed higher number of uniquely expressed genes and low correlation to the other three replicates.]
Patterns related to correlation in gene expression across different hspc populations were shown in the figure.

Text 182
10.1016/j.cell.2017.10.044
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 3. unbiased clustering reveals a common program of p-emt in hnscc tumors (a) heatmap shows differentially expressed genes (rows) identified by non-negative matrix factorization (nnmf) clustered by their expression across single cells (columns) from a representative tumor (meei25). the gene clusters reveal intra-tumoral programs that are differentially expressed in meei25. the corresponding gene signatures are numbered and selected genes indicated (right). (b) heatmap depicts pairwise correlations of 60 intra-tumoral programs derived from ten tumors, as in (a). clustering identifies seven coherent expression programs across tumors. rows in the heatmap that correspond to programs derived from meei25 are indicated by arrows and numbered as in (a). (c) heatmap shows nnmf gene scores for common (top rows) and tumor-specific (bottom rows) genes within the p-emt program by tumor (columns). (d) representative images of scc9 hnscc cells sorted by p-emt marker tgfbi into p-emthigh and p-emtlow populations and analyzed by matrigel invasion assay. (e) bar plot depicts relative invasiveness of p-emthigh and p-emtlow scc9 cells sorted and analyzed as in (d) (representative experiment; error bars, sem; anova, p < 0.005, n = 3). (f) bar plot depicts relative proliferation of p-emthigh and p-emtlow scc9 cells sorted as in (d) (representative experiment; error bars, sem; anova, p < 0.0001, n = 4). (g) (left) fluorescence-activated cell sorting plot identifies p-emthigh and p-emtlow scc9 cells isolated based on tgfbi expression. (right) histogram (offset) reveals the distribution (x axis) of tgfbi expression across cells from the respective isolates (p-emthigh, p-emtlow, and unsorted; separated by dashed lines). after 7 days in culture, p-emthigh, p-emtlow, and unsorted cells have similar distributions of p-emt marker expression. additional experiments with the p-emt marker cxadr demonstrate similar findings (data not shown). (h) violin plot depicts p-emt scores for unsorted, p-emtlow, and p-emthigh scc9 cell sorted and cultured as in (g). respective isolates largely recapitulate the initial distribution of p-emt scores. see figures s3 and s4, and table s6 and s7.']. Reference sentences:[(d) scatter plot shows the pearson correlation between the p-emt program and other expression programs underlying hnscc intra-tumoral heterogeneity (figure 3).they also had a decreased proliferation rate (figure 3f) consistent with scrna-seq analysis of patient samples (figure s4e) and prior emt studies (nieto et al. 2016; ye and weinberg 2015).six clusters of programs were identified manually (figure 3b) and used to define meta-signatures.(i) (top) heatmap shows absolute expression of housekeeping (positive) genes (top rows) and immune marker (negative) genes (bottom rows) in single cells (columns) from meei25 (same as figure 3a).defining the p-emt program in hnscc tumors and cell lines related to figure 3 (a) each panel (from top to bottom) shows the meta-signature scores (top section of panel) and a heatmap with expression of the top 10 genes for that meta- signature (bottom section of panel) for each of the six coherent expression programs in malignant cells.distinguishing the p-emt program in hnscc tumors from previously described emt programs and modeling p-emt in vitro related to figure 3 (a) correlation plot demonstrates pairwise pearson correlations between emt and p-emt programs including signatures from previous work as well as this work.]
Summary: Correlation between p-emt program and other expression programs in hnscc tumors, identified through single-cell analysis.

Text 183
10.1016/j.cell.2017.10.044
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 4. p-emt cells at the leading edge engage in cross-talk with cafs (a–c) ihc images of representative hnscc tumors (meei5, meei16, meei17, meei25, meei28) stained for p-emt markers (pdpn, lamb3, lamc2) and the malignant cell-specific marker p63 (a and b) or the epithelial program marker sprr1b (c). scale bar, 100 mm. (d) scatter plot shows the pearson correlation between the p-emt program and other expression programs underlying hnscc intra-tumoral heterogeneity (figure 3). blue circles depict the correlations within individual tumors; black circles and error-bars represent the average and sem, respectively, across the different tumors. (e) bar plot depicts numbers of putative receptor-ligand interactions between malignant hnscc cells and indicated cell types. interaction numbers were calculated based on expression of receptors and corresponding ligands in scrna-seq data. outgoing interactions refer to the sum of ligands from malignant cells that interact with receptors on the indicated cell type. incoming interactions refer to the opposite. cafs express a significantly greater number of ligands whose receptors are expressed by malignant cells (hypergeometric test, p < 0.05). (f) heatmap depicts expression of ligands expressed by in vivo and in vitro cafs. relative expression is shown for all in vivo cafs, meei18 in vivo cafs, and in vitro cafs derived from meei18.']. Reference sentences:[in contrast epithelial differentiation markers (sprr1b cldn4) stained a distinct set of cells at the core of tumors (figures 4c and s5h–s5k) consistent with the negative correlation between these programs in scrna-seq data (figure 4d).this predicted ‘‘outgoing’’ signals from malignant cells to the various tme cell types in similar proportions (figure 4e).these included interactions that may promote emt such as tgfb3-tgfbr2 fgf7-fgfr2 and cxcl12-cxcr7 (figure 4f) (moustakas and heldin 2016; ranieri et al. 2016; wu et al. 2016).although we sought to test cafs from primary tumors in co-cul- ture we found that cultured fibroblasts lost expression of typical activation markers and ligands (figure 4f) and failed to induce a p-emt response in co-cultured cancer cells (figure s5r).p-emt program is localized at the leading edge distinct from the epithelial differentiation program at the core related to figure 4 (a–c) immunohistochemical staining of representative tumors (meei5 meei16 meei17 meei25 meei28) for p-emt (lamc2 mmp10 tgfbi) with the malignant cell-specific marker p63.]
Patterns of correlation between p-emt program and other expression programs in hnscc tumors, along with receptor-ligand interactions between malignant cells and other cell types.

Text 184
10.1016/j.cell.2017.10.044
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 7. p-emt predicts nodal metastasis and adverse pathologic features (a) pc1 and pc2 gene scores based on principal component analysis (pca) of inferred malignant cell-specific profiles from all malignant-basal tcga tumors (n = 225). p-emt genes (red) and epithelial differentiation genes (green) underlie variance among malignant-basal tumors. (b) pc1 and pc2 gene scores based on pca of inferred malignant cell-specific profiles from all classical and atypical tcga tumors (n = 156). p-emt (red) and epithelial differentiation (green) genes are weakly associated with variance in these tumors. (c) bar plot depicts percentage of p-emt high and p-emt low malignant-basal tumors associated with each clinical feature (error bars reﬂect sem). higher p-emt scores were associated with positive lns, advanced nodal stage, high grade, extracapsular extension (ece), and lymphovascular invasion (lvi) (hypergeometric test, p < 0.05). advanced local disease (t3/t4) as determined by t-stage did not correlate with p-emt score. (d) volcano plot depicts gene expression differences between malignant-basal tcga tumors with multiple lns versus those without positive lns. p-emt genes (red) have increased expression, while epithelial differentiation genes (green) have decreased expression in metastatic tumors. (e) model of the in vivo p-emt program associated with invasion and metastasis in malignant-basal hnscc tumors. see figure s7.']. Reference sentences:[remarkably p-emt programs defined from these unbiased analyses of bulk expression data were highly consistent with those defined by our scrna-seq analyses (figure 7a).we found that high p-emt scores were associated with the ex- istence and number of ln metastases and with higher nodal stage (hypergeometric test; p < 0.05; figure 7c).high p-emt scores were similarly associated with adverse patholog- ical characteristics including extracapsular extension and lym- phovascular invasion (figure 7c) for which reliable biomarkers are lacking.interestingly p-emt was not associated with pri- mary tumor size (figure 7c) suggesting a direct association with invasion and metastasis but not with tumor growth.our analysis highlights a complex cellular ecosystem with active cross-talk between malignant and non-malignant cells and an in vivo p-emt program associated with metastasis (figure 7e).a c e d b figure 7. p-emt predicts nodal metastasis and adverse pathologic features (a) pc1 and pc2 gene scores based on principal component analysis (pca) of inferred malignant cell-specific profiles from all malignant-basal tcga tumors (n = 225).prognostic analysis of p-emt and caf scores to evaluate the effect of p-emt on seven clinical features (figure 7c) we compared the fractions of patients with that feature between p-emt high and p-emt low tumors and evaluated the significance of enrichments with a hypergeometric test.]
Patterns related to correlation between p-emt and adverse pathologic features in malignant-basal tumors.

Text 185
10.1016/j.molcel.2017.11.017
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 3. excitatory neuronal subtypes resolve heterogeneity in cortical layer distribution and transcriptional states driven by neuronal activity (a) heatmap for layer-specific markers and neuronal-activity-regulated genes showing cortical layer identity (l2/3/, l4, l5a/b, l6a/b), excitatory subtypes, and arg expression. (b) gsea of args between closely related neuronal subclusters. genes were ranked based on the differential expression between active (left: ex24) and inactive (right: ex25). the plot of running enrichment score (res) is shown in red (top). vertical bars (in black) in the middle indicate a gene within the arg gene set. the correlation of gene expression with subclusters is shown in the bottom histogram (in green). (c) differential expression between activated and inactivated excitatory neurons within upper (ex24 versus ex25)-layer subclusters. shown on the right are violin plots of select marker gene expression. (d) coexpression analysis of neuronal-activity-dependent genes in excitatory neuronal subtypes. spectral tsne plots (left) and density plots (right) illustrating expression of select args in upper-layer excitatory neuronal subtypes. the expression level threshold (x) for args was determined post hoc and marked by the dash line in density plots. the nuclei in tsne plots are recolored by arg expression.']. Reference sentences:[1010 molecular cell 68 1006–1015 december 7 2017 figure 3.this analysis indicated that both ex17 (false-dis- covery rate [fdr] = 0) and ex24 (fdr = 0) are significantly enriched for this set of args (figure 3b).we next determined the genes specifically enriched in activated neurons in ex17 (n = 129 genes as compared to other ex16) or ex24 (n = 157 genes as compared to ex25) neurons (figure 3c).we also observed heterogeneous expression patterns of args (rapid iegs: fos and egr1; delayed iegs: nr4a3 and pcsk1) among nuclei in ex24 (fos+: 53% in ex24 versus 5.7% in ex25; p = 1.57e-71 fisher’s exact test) and ex17 (fos+: 55% in ex17 versus 6.8% in ex17; p = 3.99e-31) excitatory neuronal clusters (figure 3d and table s2) in agreement with a continuum of transcriptional states of args revealed by a recent analysis of fos-positive neuronal nuclei isolated from adult mice exposed to a novel envi- ronment (lacar et al. 2016).this observation suggests that environmental stimuli may contribute to discontinuous transcriptomic differences figure 4. snucdrop-seq reveals cell-type specific transcriptional responses to ptz-induced seizure (a) gsea of the arg set in different cell clusters by the comparison between ptz- and saline-treated neurons was performed as in figure 3b.identification of nuclei expressing args to evaluate the fraction and heterogeneity of arg-expressing nuclei in cortical excitatory neurons (figure 3d) we examined the co-expression pattern of 4 selected args (rapid prgs: fos and egr1; delayed prgs: nr4a3 and pcsk1).]
Summary: Correlation of gene expression with excitatory neuronal subtypes and neuronal activity, shown through differential expression and coexpression analysis.

Text 186
10.1126/science.aap8809
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 3. landscapes of neuronal differentiation. (a) tsne plots colored by module eigengene expression for topographically conserved neuronal differentiation modules. (b) scatterplot of all genes for correlation with conserved differentiation network across mge lineage ( y axis) and cortical lineage (x axis) and expression of lineage-specific modules. (c) scatterplot of excitatory lineage cells']. Reference sentences:[to identify a common telencephalic differentiation program we combined gene coexpression networks across cells from the cortical and mge neuronal lineages to generate a single consensus neuronal differentiation network (fig 3a and table s8).we found that gene expression trajectories are not only highly conserved across cortical pfc and v1 areas (fig s8) but also retain striking similarity between more divergent dorsal and ventral line- ages (fig 3b and fig s8).nonetheless known and previously unidentified markers also showed lineage-specific trajectories (fig 3c) that may guide specialized aspects of lineage-specific neuro- genesis and could underlie divergence among serial sister lineages.therefore we sought to infer gene expression trajectories across both biologically relevant axes of variation by scoring cells separately along pseudodifferentiation and pseudoage axes (fig 3c and fig s8d).these transformations recovered known gene expres- sion trajectories conserved throughout neuro- genesis (for example gli3 to eomes to stmn2 in cortex) as well as parallel trajectories of differentiation that segregate by maturation stage (fig 3e and fig s8).recent studies suggest that adult cortex con- sists of at least 8 to 19 distinct excitatory neuron nowakowski et al. science 358 1318–1323 (2017) 8 december 2017 4 of 6 fig 3.]
Summary: Correlation patterns between gene expressions in neuronal differentiation lineages, with conserved and lineage-specific trajectories.

Text 187
10.1126/science.aap8809
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 2. maturation of radial glia across germinal zones. (a) schematic of early radial glia patterning. (b) heatmap of gene expression in radial glia sampled from human telencephalon, organized according to cluster. (c) wgcna reveals age-correlated modules combined into a pseudoage score. pcw, post-conception weeks. (d) pfc and v1 radial glia show a systematic difference in maturation. (e) trajectories of gene expression']. Reference sentences:[during early development the telencephalic neuroepithelium becomes regionalized by a small number of pattern- ing molecules produced at local signaling centers (9) which induce topographically distinct pat- terns of transcription factor expression in dorsal telencephalic (excitatory cortical neuron produc- ing) and ventral telencephalic (inhibitory corti- cal interneuron producing) radial glia (fig 2a).unbiased clustering highlighted a robust distinc- tion between dorsal and ventral telencephalic radial glia including reciprocal expression of pat- terning transcription factors emx1 and nkx2-1 (fig 2b).to deconvolve this axis of biological variation by using tran- scriptomic profiles we combined age-correlated gene coexpression networks to define a matura- tion score or “pseudoage.” radial glia pseudoage scores correlated strongly with the sample age (fig2candfigs.s5ands6).remarkablypseudoage trajectories between pfc and v1 radial glia dis- playedasystematicdivergence of ~3 weeks (fig 2d) revealing accelerated maturation of pfc radial glia along a common molecular program.analysis of gene expression trajectories across pseudoage further revealed that early human cortical radial glia share a conserved gene network related to wnt signaling (12) whereas genes involved in gliogenesis are up-regulated later in development (fig 2 e and f).unexpectedly early human radial glia also show enriched expression of proneural transcriptionfactorsincludingneurog2neurod6 and neurod1 (fig 2g and fig s5).to compare ra- dial glia in these laminae across maturation stages we combined gene coexpression networks cor- related with radial glia sampled from micro- dissected vz and osvz to define a lamina score or “pseudolamina” (fig 2f and fig s6).along with our previous ob- servations (21) our results indicate that multiple signaling pathways display heterogeneous acti- vation during radial glia diversification (fig 2j).]
Summary: Correlation between gene expression and maturation stages of radial glia in different regions of the telencephalon.

Text 188
10.1038/s41467-017-02001-5
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 2 putative identities of mammary epithelial cell clusters. a dendrogram of clusters based on the log-transformed mean expression values of the 15 clusters. the tree was computed based on spearman’s rank correlation with ward linkage. b t-snes with overlaid expression of cluster-specific genes. c heatmap highlighting key marker genes that were used to infer putative identities. colour scale represents log-transformed and normalised counts scaled to a maximum of 1 per row. upper bars represent the cluster assignment and stages for the individual cells. for visualisation purposes only 100 randomly selected cells were shown for large clusters']. Reference sentences:[following quality control (methods) this yielded an average of 6175 unique transcripts and 2118 genes detected from 25010 cells (4223 in np 5826 in g 9319 in l and 5642 in p) with high reproducibility between the biological replicates (supplementary fig 2 and 3).to further characterise the clusters we identified differentially expressed genes and inferred putative identities based on known marker (fig 2a b).we found that in these instances the cells showed a high similarity and expressed the same marker genes but derived from different developmental stages (see np g l or pi suffix in fig 2a) suggesting that the stage of the gland has specific effects on the transcriptional landscape of certain cell types.in the luminal compartment we found two larger subgroups (fig 2a).c1–c5 showed characteristics of hormone-sensing cells (hs) such as high expression levels of hormone receptors (pgr esr1 prlr) (fig 2b c).aldh1a3 cd14 kit)18 suggesting restricted progenitor function (hsp) (fig 2b c) whereas c3/4/5 showed a more differentiated state (hsd) (fig 2b c; table 1).c6/7 expressed high levels of progenitor markers which is consistent with a luminal progenitor (lp) phenotype (fig 2b c).wap csn2) and were exclusively composed of cells from gestation and lactation supporting the hypothesis that these are secretory alveolar cells (av) (fig 2b c; table 1).of the putative alveolar cells we noted that c10/c11 expressed genes associated with a restricted alveolar progenitor function (avp) whereas c8/c9 appeared to be in a more differentiated alveolar state (avd) (fig 2b c).in the basal compartment we found that cells from c14 showed characteristics of myoepithelial cells such as high levels of acta2 oxtr and krt15 (fig 2b c).in addition the basal compartment also contained a cluster of cells c15 that expressed high levels of procr gng11 and zeb2 suggesting that these represent the previously identified procr+ basal cells which have been shown to be enriched for mammary repopulating units19 (fig 2b c).we do note however that cells from c15 (prc) expresses high levels of the stem cell marker procr19 and high levels of the luminal progenitor marker notch335 (fig 2c).libraries prepared from all time points showed high quality that was reproducible between the two biological replicates (supplementary fig 2 and 3).this resulted in the following thresholds for total number of genes detected: 1042 for np 836 for g 500 for l and 759 for pi; and the following for total number of molecules: 2012 in np 1479 in g 1000 in l and 1379 in g. in addition all cells with 5% or more of umis mapping to mitochondrial genes were defined as non-viable or apoptotic and removed from the analysis (supplementary fig 2d).the marker genes visualised in fig 2 were identified using the ‘findmarkers’ function in scran with default settings on genes that had a median expression of 1 in at least one cluster40.]
Patterns of correlation between gene expressions in different cell clusters, indicating potential relationships between cell types based on marker genes.

Text 189
10.1038/s41593-017-0029-5
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 4 | sensory-experience-induced transcriptional responses in v1 excitatory neurons. a, fish of cbln4 with rorb, a marker specific for layer (l) 4, at 0h (control) and 4h after light stimulus. nuclei are pseudocolored according to cbln4 or rorb expression (methods). scale bars, 150 μm . experiments were repeated on two cortical slices per condition. b, heat map of log2 fold change in expression of lrgs across layer 5 subtypes between 4h and 0h. c, left, t-sne plot showing layer 2/3 excitatory neuronal subtypes. right, overlay of cdh13 expression. scale indicates normalized expression per cell; n=2,941 cells. d, left, t-sne plot of layer 4 excitatory neuronal subtypes. right, overlay of selected marker expression. scale indicates normalized expression per cell; n=3,198 cells. e, estimation of the percentage of cells with stimulus-regulated transcriptional changes (methods) at 1h (colored bars) versus 0h (gray bars). we defined induction as requiring two, three, or four induced genes within each cell from a cell-type-specific set; these requirements are represented by the lower, central, and upper lines of the box, respectively (methods). f, mean expression of cbln4 across layer 4 subtypes (nexc4_1=732, 468, and 783 cells; nexc4_2=343, 214, and 210 cells; nexc4_3=136, 137, and 175 cells for 0h, 1h, and 4h, respectively). error bars, s.e.m. g, fish quantification of cbln4 across layer 4 subtypes (rorb+calb1+ (+/+) and rorb+calb1− (+/−) ). 0h expression was not significantly different across cell types, n=97 (rorb+calb1+) or 209 (rorb+calb1−) cells, p=0.062, mann–whitney u test, two-sided. the 4-h expression was significantly higher in rorb+calb1+ than rorb+calb1− (n=127 or 286 cells, respectively), p<10−17, mann–whitney u test, two-sided. means and 95% confidence intervals are denoted by gray lines. h, left, rorb (yellow), calb1 (magenta), and hsd11b1 (cyan) expression in layer 4, as determined by fish. scale bars, 100 μm . right, quantification of the anatomical distribution of fish-defined cell types across layer 4 from n=13 cortical slices. negative/positive values on the x axis correspond to the distance from the center of layer 4 toward the slice surface (negative) or toward deeper cortical layers (positive). the shaded areas around lines indicate 95% confidence intervals around the means. the rorb+calb1+ (n=1,626 cells) population is enriched superficially within layer 4, as defined by rorb positivity (n=4,066 cells) and an increase in cell density (black). the hsd11b1+rorb+calb− (n=851 cells) population is enriched in ventral layer 4 and into superficial layer 5. further analysis can be found in supplementary fig 22. i, top right, pairwise pearson correlation between excitatory subtypes calculated on the basis of lrg expression (n=55 genes). bottom left, same analysis with expression-matched non-stimulus-regulated genes (n=55 genes). non-stimulus-regulated genes are more correlated across excitatory subtypes than are stimulus-regulated lrgs.']. Reference sentences:[the indrops dataset was analyzed through two independent clustering approaches to classify individual cells into cell types according to their patterns of gene expression thus generating a final dataset containing 47209 cells (supplementary fig 4 and methods).for example cbln4 which encodes cerebellin 4 a secreted fac- tor implicated in inhibitory synapse recruitment26 was enriched in layer 4 excitatory neurons as confirmed by fish (fig 4a).however despite the anatomical proximity of these neuronal populations several of their stimulus-dependent genes were subset enriched (fig 4b).further subclustering of excitatory populations revealed two layer 2/3 and three layer 4 excitatory neuron subtypes in agree- ment with previous transcriptionally defined cell types (methods fig 4cd and supplementary fig 15–18).noninduced gene markers included cdh13 for layer 2/3 and ctxn3 calb1 and hsd11b1 for layer 4 (fig 4cd and supplementary fig 19 and 20).these layer 2/3 and layer 4 excitatory neuronal cell types displayed marked differences in expe- rience-regulated transcriptional responses (fig 4e).for example cbln4 was differentially expressed across layer 4 subtypes and the largest light-stimulus induction occurred within the calb1+ subtype (fig 4f) as corroborated via fish (fig 4g).in layer 4 we first examined the two most transcrip- tionally responsive layer 4 subpopulations calb1+ and hsd11b1+ neurons (fig 4e) which differed in 44 of the 90 stimulus-regulated genes identified within these subtypes.resource nature neuroscience were enriched superficially the hsd11b1+ neuronal population was found deep within layer 4 and spanned the boundary between lay- ers 4 and 5 (fig 4h and supplementary fig 22).moreover we found that the lrg programs activated in response to visual stimulation were highly cell type specific and probably contributed to the cellu- lar features defining the function of each subtype within the circuit (fig 4i).subtypes of excitatory neurons were marked by cdh13 calb1 ctxn3 hsd11b1 (fig 4h supplementary fig 20–22) gpr88 bcl6 and nnat (supplementary fig 14).two independent approaches (t-sne based and seurat based; described below) were used to cluster cells (described in supplementary fig 4).in fig 4i left a union of all lrgs initially identified in excl23 excl4 excl5_1 excl5_2 and excl5_3 cell types was created (51 genes).in fig 4i right a random set of expression-matched non-lrgs was generated and a correlation was computed in the same manner as that for the lrgs.we confirmed that the cell-type-specific expression of the marker genes shown in fig 4cd and in supplementary fig 19 was not a function of sequencing depth across layer 2/3 and layer 4 subtypes with the analysis described below (supplementary fig 20).]
Summary: Correlation patterns of stimulus-regulated genes in excitatory neuronal subtypes were analyzed, showing subtype-specific responses to visual stimulation.

Text 190
10.1038/nbt.4042
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 3 inter-individual variability in ifn-β response. (a) t-sne plot of unstimulated (blue) and ifn-β-stimulated (red) pbmcs and the presumed cell types. cm, cd14+cd16– monocytes; ncm, cd14+cd16+ monocytes; dc, dendritic cells; mkc, megakaryocytes; th, cd4+ t cells; b, b cells; tc, cd8+ t cells; nk, natural killer cells. (b) cell-type-specific expression in stimulated (left) and unstimulated (right) cells. differentially expressed genes shown (fdr < 0.05, |log(fc)| > 1). each column represents cell-type-specific expression for each individual from demuxlet. (c) observed variance (y axis) in mean expression over all pbmcs from each of the eight individuals versus expected variance (x axis) over synthetic replicates sampled across all cells (light blue, pink) or replicates matched for cell type proportion (blue, red). (d) cell type proportions for each individual in unstimulated and stimulated cells. (e) correlation between sample replicates in control and stimulated cells. (f) number of significantly variable genes in each cell type and condition.']. Reference sentences:[]
Summary: Correlation patterns in gene expression variability across different cell types and conditions in single-cell transcriptomics data.

Text 191
10.1038/s41556-017-0013-z
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 3 | oscillating patterns of gene expression during somitogenesis can be inferred from scrna-seq data. a, schematic of mouse somitogenesis, which proceeds along the ap axis. from the tail bud (posterior) extends the psm, which gives rise to somites (anterior). on the right, travelling waves of gene expression of oscillatory genes are shown along with signalling gradients on the ap axis; fgf and wnt are posterior-high, whereas retinoic acid has the opposite pattern. b, diffusion map of the cells from the mesoderm progenitors, psm and somitic mesoderm clusters (n=2,999), ordered based on the expression of genes that correlated with fgf8 expression; the first two diffusion components are shown. the colour gradient indicates the trajectory from mesoderm progenitors to somites as a pseudo-space measurement, as in c. dpt, diffusion pseudo-time. c, heatmap of the genes involved in establishing signalling gradients. aldh1a2 encodes the enzyme that synthesizes retinoic acid, whereas cyp26a1 encodes the enzyme that degrades retinoic acid. cells have been ordered in pseudo-space on the x axis. each gene is regularized so that the expression values are within [0,1]. mp, mesoderm progenitors. d, expression changes along the pseudo-space trajectory can be clustered into six groups, one of which (last) shows a wave-like pattern that is consistent with oscillatory expression. the mean regularized probability of expression for all genes in each cluster is plotted as a solid line and the shading around it shows ±1 s.d. e, heatmap of the expression of all genes in the last cluster from d. cells have been ordered in pseudo-space on the x axis. each gene is regularized so that the expression values are within [0,1]. f, representative heatmap of the same genes as in e on the dissected psm of an embryo that was split into five segments from posterior to anterior, as schematized at the far right in a. six biological replicates were analysed, all with similar results; the other five replicates are presented in supplementary fig 3b. g, regularized logistic fit of the expression across the pseudo-space for genes with well-characterized oscillatory expression16. most show a wave-like pattern. h, expression pattern of cited1 in dissected segments of psm from the most posterior to the most anterior, for six different biological replicates. the gene shows a wave-like pattern, and different embryos peak at different regions of the psm.']. Reference sentences:[motivated by this we focused on the process of somitogenesis which involves the segmentation of the developing embryonic body axis into somites and is guided by oscillating genes which create waves of expression that travel across the presomitic mesoderm (psm) from posterior to anterior16 (fig 3a).the poste- rior end of the psm is marked by high levels of wnt and fibroblast growth factor (fgf) signalling whereas somites show high levels of retinoic acid16 (fig 3a).we first ordered cells along a putative anteroposterior (ap) axis by using genes that were highly correlated with fgf8 expres- sion which serves as a positional landmark16 (fig 3b).the inferred pseudo-space axis recapitulated the expected signalling gradients from the highest expression of fgf8 to the highest expression of aldh1a2 which encodes the synthesizing enzyme of retinoic acid (fig 3c).the expression profiles of 1000 genes were inconsistent with constant expression across pseudo-space (fig 3d; see methods); 93 of these genes showed wave-like expression that peaked along the pseudo-space trajectory (fig 3e) and included several well- known regulators of somitogenesis such as hes5 lfng and dll1 (ref.indeed when examining the expression across pseudo-space of experimentally characterized oscillating genes most showed wave-like expression (fig 3g).moreover we identified several genes where oscillatory activity has not been reported (fig 3e) but that behave similarly to classic oscillating genes.one of these cited1 (fig 3e) has been identified as being expressed within the psm17 and is known to block epithelial differentiation in the kidney18.to validate these findings we dissected the psm of four differ- ent mouse embryos—keeping the left and right sides separate— and divided each into five segments from posterior to anterior (supplementary fig 3a and supplementary video 1).the expression dynamics across the ap axis of the 93 genes we defined as oscillatory (fig 3e) were well correlated to the single- cell data (median pearson’s correlation interquartile range for all genes = 0.51–0.78; fig 3f and supplementary fig 3b) and so were the profiles of well-characterized oscillatory genes (supplementary fig 3c).furthermore the expression profile of cited1 showed a wave-like pattern in five out of the six replicates peaking at distinct locations along the ap axis consistent with embryo-specific wave progression (fig 3h).letters nature cell biology a newly forming somites travelling waves of gene expression psm formed somites notochord lateral view dorsal view fgf wnt retinoic acid signalling gradients head heart tail bud posterior anterior 0 0.08 0.16 0.12 0.04 dc1 dc2 dpt b c mps somites aldh1a2 cyp26a1 fgf8 low d low e cited1 lmo2 frzb dll3 dll1 tbx6 gbx2 snai1 osr1 nrarp epha4 lfng notch1 dlk1 dkk1 lmo1 fgf9 lhx1 nkd2 f hes1 hes5 hes7 lfng nrarp dkk1 dll1 dact1 snai1 regularized probability of expression g regularized expression h high high fig 3 | oscillating patterns of gene expression during somitogenesis can be inferred from scrna-seq data.six biological replicates were analysed all with similar results; the other five replicates are presented in supplementary fig 3b.to model the expression pattern across the ap axis (segments 1 to 5) we fitted a degree 2 model using local linear regression (locfit function with nn set to 1); we then used this model to predict the expression levels across 17 regularly spaced intervals from most posterior to most anterior to generate smoother profiles (fig 3h and supplementary fig 3c).]
Oscillatory gene expression patterns during somitogenesis are inferred from single-cell data, showing wave-like expression across pseudo-space trajectory.

Text 192
10.1186/s13059-017-1362-4
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 5 infiltration of blood-derived tams varies by glioma molecular subtype and correlates with inferior survival. a z-scores of averages over blood-derived (top) and microglial (bottom)-tam signature genes, compared across glioma subtypes (n = 371 cases, 117 oligodendrogliomas [oligs], 110 astrocytomas [astros], 144 gbms). cls classical, mes mesenchymal, pn proneural. significance was assessed via tukey’s range test. ns indicates the test is not significant at p = 0.05. b kaplan–mayer survival curves, based on lgg tcga rna-seq for which survival information is available (n = 363 cases). gene expression was averaged over the blood-derived and microglial signature genes, respectively, to assign a signature score to each case. the median signature score was used to divide cases into high-expressing and low-expressing cohorts. all comparisons were adjusted for age and gender, using cox proportional-hazards regression. hr hazard ratio']. Reference sentences:[our data show a signifi- cant increase in blood-derived tams but not in microglial tams in gbm compared to lgg (fig 5a).however there is no correl- ation between survival and the microglial-tam signature (fig 5b).genome biology (2017) 18:234 page 9 of 14 support this being due to increased bmdm induction (fig 5a).]
Patterns related to correlation between blood-derived TAM signature genes and glioma molecular subtypes, impacting survival.

Text 193
10.1016/j.celrep.2017.12.017
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 5. rps share a core transcriptional identity throughout embryogenesis (a) venn diagram showing the overlap in genes significantly upregulated in rp clusters relative to all other cell clusters (p < 0.01 fwer) at e13.5, e15.5, and e17.5. (b) t-sne visualizations of e13.5, e15.5, and e17.5 scrna-seq data overlaid with expression of ednrb, mfge8, vcam1, dbi, and ttyh1 mrnas. cells are colorcoded according to expression levels, ranging from not detected (yellow) to the highest detected levels (blue), according to the adjacent color key. boxed regions highlight rp clusters and are shown at higher resolution at the bottom right. for e13.5, rp clusters are outlined in red. (c) functional classification of the 90 core identity genes using panther. (d and e) pearson correlation analysis of the average expression of each gene detected by scrna-seq in e17.5 rps versus e13.5 non-proliferative (d) (cluster 2 in figure 4a) or proliferative (e) (cluster 8 in figure 4a) rp clusters. red dots denote genes with low correlations/high average differences.']. Reference sentences:[identification of an embryonic rp core transcriptional identity we next asked how rps progressed transcriptionally over time by comparing the genes that were significantly differentially enriched (p < 0.01 fwer) in rps relative to all other clusters at e13.5 e15.5 and e17.5 (figure 5a; table s2).of 739 mrnas in total 98 were enriched at all three ages (figure 5a; table s3).overlays showed that 65 of these were highly enriched in rps throughout embryogenesis (examples are shown in figure 5b and figure s4a) with some expressed at lower levels in ips and scattered neurons (summarized in table s3).the final and largest group included less well-characterized genes within the neural precursor context including ednrb mfge8 ttyh1 metrn pdpn pon2 sparc pea15a ddah1 sfrp1 ckb gas1 mt1 mt2 mt3 zfp36l1 ppap2b gsta4 psat1 phgdh tead2 efhd2 gpx8 rcn1 kbtbd11 fgfbp3 gm11627 serpinh1 cyr61 cd63 myo10 2810417h13rik acadl oat magt1 and asrgl1 (exam- ples are shown in figure 5b and figure s4a).a similar overlay analysis for 47 mrnas enriched only at e15.5 and e17.5 (figure 5a) identified 25 additional mrnas that were highly enriched in rps (examples are shown in figure s4b).cell reports 21 3970–3986 december 26 2017 3977 figure 5.protein annotation through evolutionary relation- ship (panther) classification identified transcription factors as one major protein class encoded by these genes (figure 5c) including ten transcription factors (hopx hes5 sox2 hes1 sox21 sox9 tfap2c nr2e1 tead2 and pax6) and four tran- scriptional regulators (id3 id1 hmgb2 and id4).correlation analysis (figure 5d) demonstrated that although e17.5 and e13.5 non-proliferative rps were very similar (rho = 0.90) there was increased e17.5 expression of the core rp genes fabp7 apoe slc1a3/glast mfge8 ednrb ptprz1 mt3 tnc and id3.the comparison between e17.5 rps and proliferative e13.5 rps led to similar conclusions (figure 5e) with variance between the two due to increased e17.5 expression of rp core genes and increased e13.5 expression of cell cycle-associated genes like cenpf top21 cdca8 and mki67 (figure 5e).expression of all of these genes was increased in individual rps from e13.5 to e17.5 (figure 5f) demonstrating a reinforce- ment of the rp transcriptional identity over this time frame.]
Correlation patterns in core transcriptional identity of rp clusters across embryogenesis, with increased expression of specific genes in e17.5 rps compared to e13.5.

Text 194
10.1016/j.celrep.2017.12.046
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 3. coordinately regulated gene sets contribute to the transcriptional identities of l6cthns (a) wgcna on variance-stabilized gene expression estimates identifies modules of coordinately regulated genes grouped using hierarchical clustering of module eigengenes. (b) pearson correlation of each module eigengene with both transcriptional subtype and label. significance (asterisk) was determined using the pearson’s product moment test (p < 0.01, benjamini-hochberg corrected). (c) pearson correlation of each module eigengene with component rotations for pcs 1–5. (d and e) enrichment of the 286 genes differentially expressed between l6cthn subtypes (d) and genes associated with neuronal activity (e) within each module (hypergeometric test, p < 0.01, benjamini-hochberg corrected). see also figure s5 and table s4.']. Reference sentences:[a b c d e figure 3.]
Patterns of coordinately regulated gene sets contributing to transcriptional identities in single cells, assessed through correlation with subtypes and functional labels.

Text 195
10.1016/j.celrep.2017.12.046
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 4. variation in the transcriptional profiles of l6cthns is defined by subtype-specific genes, genes reﬂecting laminar location, and genes induced by neuronal activity (a and d) t-sne plots showing the eigenvalue for each cell for the two wgcna modules most correlated with pc1 (a, midnight blue; d, turquoise). (b, c, e, and f) t-sne plots (left) showing the normalized gene expression in each cell for representative genes with significant weights on pc1. (b) and (c) belong to the midnight blue module and (e) and (f) to the turquoise module. single-molecule ﬂuorescence in situ hybridization (smfish; middle) of mrnas detected for']. Reference sentences:[cell reports 22 441–455 january 9 2018 445 a b c d e f g figure 4.single-molecule ﬂuorescence in situ hybridization (smfish; middle) of mrnas detected for (legend continued on next page) 446 cell reports 22 441–455 january 9 2018 varied with laminar position within l6 in both l6cthns and non- l6cthns (figure 4c).among the four activity-associated modules (figure 4g; black green purple and midnight blue) black was specifically corre- lated with subtype 1 and purple and midnight blue with sub- type 2 suggesting subtype-specific engagement of activity- induced genes in the steady state.]
Patterns related to correlation between gene modules and cell subtypes, laminar location, and neuronal activity-induced genes in single cells.

Text 196
10.1038/s41593-017-0056-2
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 1 | transcriptional architecture of the mouse dentate gyrus. a, sampling timepoints (top) along postnatal dentate gyrus development (schematic bottom). left: perinatal migration of npcs, generating outer granule layer (green). middle: early postnatal radial migration of npcs from the neurogenic niche (orange). right: adult neurogenesis from npcs retained in the subgranular zone (red). b, heatmap of 22 clusters from 5,454 cells (all sampled timepoints), represented by their top marker genes (648 genes), expression normalized by gene. heatmap colors as in c. c, dendrogram and correlation matrix of the 22 clusters identified. yellow boxes in the dendrogram indicate main cell classes. vlmc, vascular and leptomeningeal cell; pvm, perivascular macrophage; ol, oligodendrocyte; nfol, newly formed oligodendrocyte; opc, oligodendrocyte precursor cell. d, t-sne visualization of 5,454 cells, colored by cluster annotation. e, structure of the dentate gyrus and previously described spatial organization of cell types in relation to clusters identified in this dataset (ml, molecular layer; gl, granule layer; h, hilus; ca3, hippocampus ca3 pyramidal layer; cr, cajal–retzius).']. Reference sentences:[the majority of granule cells are born perinatally with substan- tial numbers of cells generated until around postnatal day (p) 10 (fig 1a)23.all datasets are summarized in supplementary fig 1.focusing first on dataset a (fig 1a) graph-based clustering anal- ysis (markov clustering26 of the mutual k nearest neighbor graph; see methods) revealed 22 distinct types of cells (fig 1b) which we arranged in four major categories (fig 1c): vascular (endothelial pericytes and vascular leptomeningeal cells) immune (microg- lia and perivascular macrophages) glial and neuronal cell types.visualizing these cells using t-distributed stochastic neighbor embed- ding (t-sne27; fig 1d) revealed the entire architecture of the postna- tal developing dentate gyrus in detail (fig 1e).we found 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 3 vlmc 5 pvm 6 ol 7 nfol 8 opc 9 astrocytes 11 nipc 1 endothelial 2 pericytes 4 microglia 10 radial glia-like 12 neuroblast 1 13 neuroblast 2 14 granule-immature 15 granule-mature 16 cck-tox 17 mossy-adcyap1 18 mossy-cyp26b1 19 mossy-klk8 20 gaba-cnr1 21 gaba-lhx6 22 cajal-retzius 14 15 22 2021 19 161718 1 2 345 6 7 8 13 101112 9 vlmc pvm ol nfol opc radial glia-like endothelial pericytes microglia astrocytes nipc neuroblast 1 neuroblast 2 granule (mature) cck-tox mossy-adcyap1 mossy-cyp26b1 mossy-klk8 gaba-cnr1 gaba-lhx6 cajal–retzius embryonic early postnatal p12 p16 p24 p35 juvenile adult chromium sampling ml h a b c d e vascular immune glia neuron p12 p16 p24 p35 26 18 79 35 66 335 88 165 33 169 165 97 777 1333 1712 27 33 75 29 33 66 93 number of cells in cluster cluster number cluster name cell class cluster correlation cr gaba mossy 15 genes clusters neurogenic granule (immature) gl ca3 11 121314 10 fig 1 | transcriptional architecture of the mouse dentate gyrus.heatmap colors as in fig 1c.in the t-sne plot which arranges cells based on their overall transcriptional similarity nipcs were located at the root of a trajectory leading to mature granule cells (fig 1d).b heatmap of genes with differential expression between the maturing cell types sorted by their peak cluster; colors as in fig 1c.c t-sne (as in fig 1d) stained by contribution from each sampling timepoint.d t-sne (as in fig 1d) stained by expression of four markers: prox1 (pan-gc) fxyd7 (immature gc-enriched) and plk5 and ntng1 (mature gc-enriched).as granule cells matured they transitioned from the still glia-like neu- roblasts (fig 1de) into an immature granule cell state and finally to mature granule cells (fig 4a).we sampled 2303 single cells at 17 developmental timepoints extending into adulthood from p8 to p68 (supplementary fig 1).taking advantage of the denser temporal sampling we not only confirmed the rapid maturation of granule cells around the third postnatal week but also found that it occurs in a very short time interval (supplementary fig 1).to address these questions we generated a third larger data- set (dataset c; 10x chromium) spanning perinatal (e16.5–p5) juvenile (p18–p23) and adult (p120–p132) animals (fig 5a–d and supplementary fig 1 and 7).this was true both for cells sampled without selection and for hgfap:gfp+ cells sorted by fluorescence-activated cell sorting (facs supplementary fig 1g; compare also the result from dataset b in supplementary fig 5).immature granule cells were found only in young animals while in adults these were almost absent (supplementary fig 1 and 5d).]
Summary: Correlation patterns among cell clusters in the dentate gyrus during development, visualized by t-SNE and heatmap analysis.

Text 197
10.1186/s13059-017-1384-y
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 1 molecular heterogeneity of epidermal cells in culture. a epidermal cell transcriptomes and cell state relation visualised using ddrtree and coloured according to unsupervised clustering. each data point is one cell and axes are dimensionally reduced components of the cell transcriptomes. colours and numbers represent the five identified cell states. b gene expression for four marker genes shown for each cell on the state map. top left: integrin beta-1 (itgb1), a basal ife marker. top right: s100 differentiation associated genes. bottom left: mt2, a basal ife marker. bottom right: keratin 10, a suprabasal ife marker of commitment to differentiation. c barplot showing mean expression per cell averaged over all keratin associated messenger rnas (mrna) (top) and all collagen mrnas (bottom). d distribution of the expression of cluster-specific markers coloured according to cell state. two markers are shown per cell state. black line represents the median expression of the cluster. e median expression of the top three markers for each state per cell on the state map. f heatmap showing the similarity between epidermal cells from this study and ife cells from joost et al. similarity is measured by pearson’s correlation coefficient. cells from this study are coloured by cluster along the vertical axis. cells from joost et al. are coloured by differentiation status along the horizontal axis. joost et al. ife cell legend is shown in order of differentiation status. b basal ife cells, di/dii differentiated suprabasal ife cells, ki/kii keratinized ife cells. g heatmap showing similarity between cluster average transcriptomes from this study and proliferative ife cells from zhang et al. [14] and activated vs quiescent ife cells from lien et al. [15]. Reference sentences:]we identified five distinct in vitro cell states (fig 1a) forming three major branches that represent varying states of proliferation and differentiation.these expression patterns indicate states a and e represent transcriptomic signatures before commitment to differ- entiation (fig 1b; top left) [13].itgb1 another marker of basal ife cells showed variable expression in vitro in comparison to mt2 but was expressed in all cells (fig 1b; top right).the differentiation marker krt10 was variably expressed across all subgroups (fig 1b; bottom right) [4].states b c and d express significantly more keratin messenger rnas (mrna) and conversely states a and e are characterised by higher collagen mrna levels (fig 1c; kolmogorov–smirnov test p < 0.05).for each cell state we determined genes differentially expressed vs the remainder of the population and identified be- tween six (state b) and 101 (state c) markers (fig 1d additional file 2: table s1).we observed that the median expression of the top three markers for each state was sufficient to distinguish each state (fig 1e).from comparison with the joost ife subpopulations all of our single cells correlate strongly with basal ife stem cells as expected since large (>20 μm) terminally differentiated cells were excluded from the analysis (fig 1f).(fig 1g).figure 1a summa- rises the state classification of cells as determined by our cluster and ddrtree analysis highlighting the relation- ship between our three branches composed of five identi- fied keratinocyte states.we reanalysed these data to estimate the relative proportion of cells in each of the cell states iden- tified in vitro (fig 1a).taken together these results indicate that bcl3 and smad4 are specific markers of the epidermal state transi- tion and mark cells moving along the trajectory between state a and state d (fig 1) during the first 24 h of exposure to a nca wnt signal.related to fig 1e.]
Summary: Correlation between cell states and gene expression patterns, differentiation markers, and marker genes in single-cell epidermal transcriptomes.

Text 198
10.1073/pnas.1717871115
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 2. transcriptional dynamics across lgn development. (a) timeline of postnatal lgn development, highlighting overarching developmental processes and their correlations with distinct phases. (b–d) volcano plots indicating genes identified as developmentally regulated (light blue dots) in excitatory neurons based on an absolute log2-fold change >1 and false discovery rate <0.05 between p5 and p10 (b), p10 and p16 (c), and p16 and p21 (d). (e) number of genes that change significantly (≥2-fold, fdr <0.05) across each temporal transition in astrocytes, endothelial cells, excitatory neurons, microglia, and oligodendrocytes (left to right). (f) heatmap of gene transcript count (log-normalized to 10,000 transcripts per cell) for the top 100 genes that vary across development, clustered by expression pattern across development. rows represent genes and columns represent excitatory cells, grouped by developmental time point. (g) violin plot based on scrna-seq data (top) and confocal fish images (bottom) showing developmental regulation of c1qa (green) in microglia identified by expression of cx3cr1 (red). ages are listed below. (scale bar, 5 μm.) (h) violin plot based on scrna-seq data (top) and confocal fish images (bottom) showing developmental regulation of mbp (green) in oligodendrocytes identified by expression of olig1 (red). ages are listed below. (scale bar, 5 μm.) (i) violin plot based on scrna-seq data (top) and confocal fish images (bottom) showing developmental regulation of grin2b (green) in excitatory neurons identified by expression of stmn2 (red). ages are listed below. (scale bar, 5 μm.)']. Reference sentences:[in the lgn postnatal development has been well-characterized and involves distinct but overlapping stages of circuit assembly and refinement (fig 2a).for example we found 199 612 and 152 genes significantly changed between p5 and p10 p10 and p16 and p16 and p21 in excitatory neurons respectively (fig 2 b–d).0 200 400 600 0 200 400 600 0 200 400 600 -log10 q value differentially expressed genes a e g h i f b c d fig 2.we found that different cell types exhibit diverse temporal patterns of transcriptional activity likely correlating with unique functions of each cell type at different points of development (fig 2e).on the other hand neurons were most transcriptionally dynamic between p10 and p16 two time points that flank the onset of visual experience at eye opening (fig 2 d and e).we then clustered the genes based on their temporal expression ki- netics across the four developmental time points (fig 2f).we confirmed by fish the cell type-specific developmental regulation of these genes as well as other genes with previously described cell-type distributions including the secreted growth factor ndnf in endothelial cells the synaptogenic molecule hevin in astrocytes and the myelin component mbp in oligodendrocytes (fig 2 g and h and fig s3).]
Temporal correlation of gene expression patterns across different cell types during postnatal development.

Text 199
10.1038/s41590-018-0051-0
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 6 | tregs that express the same tcrα/β sequence have related transcriptional programs. a, two-dimensional tsne plot of tregs from the colon lamina propria, in seven panels with single treg cells with the same rearranged tcrα/βsequences highlighted in red. v/j alleles and cdr3 sequences are indicated above each panel. data from two different experiments (top four and bottom three panels). b, cell–cell correlation between colonic treg cells that express the same rearranged tcrα/β (n =14 cell–cell correlations) or unrelated tcrs (n =1,000 correlations between any treg in the data, randomly sampled). p < 10−4 (two-tailed t test). box plot: center line, median; box limits, upper and lower quartiles.']. Reference sentences:[the data (1265 to 1567 cells per bin) were processed and ana- lyzed in the probabilistic framework described for fig 4 and each cell was assigned according to its probability of belonging to clusters 1–6 (supplementary fig 6).the pro- portion of cells in cluster 3 increased with gfp while the proportion of cells in clusters 1 and 2 decreased (fig 5d and supplementary fig 6).with two exceptions these clonotype pairs belonged to cells that mapped close to each other on the tsne plot (fig 6a).indeed the transcriptomes of tregs that shared their tcrs were more closely correlated than by chance (p < 10−4) thereby confirming the signifi- cance of the observation (fig 6b).]
Summary: Correlated transcriptional programs in cells with the same TCRα/β sequence, confirmed by significant cell-cell correlations (p < 10−4).

Text 200
10.1038/s41590-018-0051-0
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 3 | treg-signature expression in single treg and tconv cells. a, mean expression in collapsed treg and tconv single-cell datasets (normalized counts) (n =708 tregs and 1,098 tconvs). canonical up- and downregulated treg-signature genes12 are highlighted (red and blue, respectively). b, gene–gene correlation heat map for the canonical treg-signature genes, calculated across all treg and tconv single-cell datasets. c, gene–gene correlation as in b, but calculated in the treg single-cell dataset only.']. Reference sentences:[we systematically compared tregs with their closest tconvs (correlation distances) (supplementary fig 3a) and identified a small gene set (il2ra il2rb ikzf2 ctla4 capg tnfrsf4 tnfrsf18 izumo1r chchd10 gpr83 and ex officio foxp3) that was overexpressed by all tregs irrespective of their location on the tsne plot (fig 2k).these genes are all direct targets of foxp3: they all contain enhancer elements that bind foxp3 in chromatin immunoprecipitation experiments2930 (supplementary fig 3b) and are up regulated upon ectopic foxp3 expression in tconvs.collapsing the present single-cell data reca- pitulated the signature observed in previous microarray or popula- tion rna-seq datasets thus confirming congruence between the techniques (fig 3a).within the entire dataset including both splenic tregs and tconvs there was as expected a clear partitioning of treg-up versus treg-down signature transcripts (fig 3b) and a generally positive but weak correlation between treg-up transcripts except for a small cluster of highly cor- related genes (fig 3b).as expected this tightly co-regulated core set vanished when we tested for correlations within tregs only aiming to identify co-regu- lated components independently of their covariation relative to tconvs (fig 3c).]
Summary: Correlation patterns of treg-signature genes across single cells, with distinct correlations observed between tregs and tconvs.

Text 201
10.1016/j.celrep.2018.01.043
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 1. experimental protocol (a) images of e10.5 whole tg(nr5a1-gfp) mouse embryo (merge of bright-field and uv light) and xy gonads at five stages of development under uv light (scale bars, 500 mm). (b) co-immunoﬂuorescence of gfp and marker genes for interstitial progenitors (nr2f2), fetal leydig cells (hsd3b), sertoli cells (sox9), and germ cells (ddx4) at e16.5. gfp co-localizes with the somatic cell markers but not with the germ cell marker. (c) experimental design. xy gonads at each stage were collected, nr5a1-gfp+ cells were sorted by facs, single-cell captured, and harvested cdna was processed nextera for libraries, and sequenced. (d) distribution of the number of detected genes per cell. (e) correlation between the expression of the nr5a1-gfp transgene and the endogenous nr5a1 gene (log(rpkm+1)).']. Reference sentences:[the nr5a1-gfp+ cells from the genital ridges were sorted by ﬂuorescence-activated cell sorting (facs) and individually captured and processed with the fluidigm c1 autoprep sys- tem (figure 1c; figure s1).cells expressed a total of 16459 protein-coding genes (reads per kilobase per million mapped reads [rpkm] > 0) with a me- dian of 5628 genes per cell (figure 1d).a strong correlation (r = 0.82 spearman correlation) between the levels of gfp and endogenous nr5a1 transcripts confirmed the reliability of the tg(nr5a1-gfp) reporter (figure 1e; figure s3).patients display genital abnormalities including testicular dysplasia and cryptorchidism figure 1.]
Summary: Correlation between expression of transgene and endogenous gene in single cells from genital ridges.

Text 202
10.1016/j.cels.2018.01.014
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 2. averaging gene expression estimates across all cells in single-cell rna sequencing shows good correspondence across platforms (a) distribution of transcriptome coverage (number of genes detected per cell) for dropseq (left) and fluidigm (right). (b) correlation of averaged gene expression estimates between single-molecule rna fish (smrna fish) and single-cell rna (scrna) sequencing. (c) correlation of average gene expression estimates between dropseq and smrna fish at different levels of transcriptome coverage using four different population sizes (50, 250, 500, and 2000 cells). error bars in (c) represent ±1 sd across bootstrap replicates. (d) correlation of averaged gene expression estimates between sequencing platforms. error bars in (b) and (d) represent two times the sem.']. Reference sentences:[to illustrate these considerations experimentally we measured the effect of subsampling on transcriptome coverage by observing the number of genes detected per cell (figure 2a).after we confirmed that most of our data repre- sented transcriptomes from single cells rather than doublets (figure s1b) we selected the top 8600 cell barcodes for the remainder of the analysis with a median sequencing depth of a c b d figure 2.we pooled single-cell rna-sequencing data from all cells regardless of transcriptome coverage and compared the resulting mean for each of 23–26 genes with the mean obtained by smrna fish (figure 2b).as we ex- pected as the number of cells included in the analysis increased so did the correlation between mean gene expression estimates (figure 2c).to that end we compared each single-cell rna-sequencing dataset with bulk rna-sequencing data (dropseq r = 0.94 fluidigm r = 0.92) and compared fluidigm and dropseq with each other (r = 0.95) (figure 2d).]
Patterns of gene expression correlation across different single-cell RNA sequencing platforms and technologies.

Text 203
10.1016/j.cels.2018.01.014
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 3. estimates of gene expression heterogeneity in single-cell rna sequencing are highly dependent on transcriptome coverage (a) the gini coefficient measures a gene’s expression distribution and captures rare cell population heterogeneity. (b) population structure of sox10 mrna levels measured by dropseq (pink), fluidigm (blue), and single-molecule rna fish (smrna fish, brown). (c) gini coefficient for six genes measured by dropseq (left y axis) binned by levels of transcriptome coverage as well as gini coefficients measured by smrna fish (right y axis). (d) pearson correlation between gini coefficients measured through dropseq and smrna fish across different levels of transcriptome coverage (number of genes detected per cell). error bars represent ±1 sd across bootstrap replicates. (e and f) scatterplots of the correspondence between gini coefficients for 26 genes measured by both dropseq and smrna fish. (e) all cells included in comparison. (f) cells with >2,000 genes detected per cell included in comparison. (g) scatterplot of the correspondence between gini coefficients for 26 genes measured by fluidigm and smrna fish. (h) pearson correlation between gini coefficient estimates measured by dropseq and smrna fish using different population sizes (number of cells) and levels of transcriptome coverage. red arrows are discussed in the text. error bars represent ±1 sd across bootstrap replicates. (i) pearson correlation between gini coefficient estimates measured by dropseq and smrna fish after subsampling cells with high transcriptome coverage to different degrees of read depth. numbers inside the bars represent the number of reads subsampled. the x axis represents the average number of genes detected across all cells at a given subsample depth. error bars represent ±1 sd across bootstrap replicates.']. Reference sentences:[we found that the correlation with single-molecule rna fish was fairly strong for both single-cell rna-sequencing methods (dropseq r = 0.61; fluidigm r = 0.63) (see also padovan-merhar et al. 2015; a b c d e f g h i figure 3.intermediate gini coefficients correspond to intermediate levels of heterogeneity (figure 3a).we found that when we use very low thresholds for transcriptome coverage the gini coefficient estimates from single-cell rna sequencing were generally higher than in smrna fish; for instance sox10 has a gini coefficient of 0.38 by smrna fish but has a gini coefficient of 0.91 by dropseq and 0.51 by fluidigm (figure 3a).practically this means that the population distribution of sox10 mrna levels estimated by single-cell rna sequencing can be drasti- cally different from the true distribution as measured by smrna fish (figure 3b).to test this hypothesis we binned the dropseq dataset which had cells of widely vary- ing transcriptome coverages by the number of genes detected per cell and computed the gini coefficients for genes for which we had smrna fish data (figure 3c).for each of the bins we then calculated the pearson correlation coefficient between the gini coefficients measured by smrna fish and by dropseq (figure 3d).the fluidigm dataset yielded similar correlations (figure 3g).we tested this prediction by estimating the gini coefficient for a range of sample sizes (that is number of cells included per sample) for cells binned by number of genes detected per cell (figure 3h).for both subsampled (figure 3i) and un-subsampled (figure 3d) cells the correspondence of gini estimates decreased significantly below a coverage of 1000 genes detected per cell.]
Patterns related to correlation between gene expression heterogeneity measurements in single-cell RNA sequencing methods and single-molecule RNA FISH.

Text 204
10.1681/ASN.2017080890
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 3. transcriptional profiling of mouse and putative human npcs assisted by intracellular staining of six2/six2 followed by facs (maris). (a) separation of six2+ cell population from dissociated mouse (m) embryonic kidney cortex cells by either facs of six2gfp reporter line (middle) or six2 maris (right). (b) gene-level correlation of normalized mrna-seq reads between npc profiles generated by six2 reporter line (six2gfp+) and six2 maris (msix2+). (c) overlap (left) between npc-specific genes identified by differential gene expression analysis between six2gfp+ versus six2gfp2 (tpm_six2gfp+.5, tpm_six2gfp+/tpm_six2gfp2.3, p,0.05), or between msix2+ versus msix22 (tpm_msix2+.5, tpm_msix2+/tpm_six22.3, p,0.05). results (middle) of go term enrichment analysis of the indicated gene sets, with representative ones (right) from each set of genes. (d) separation of six2+ cell population from dissociated human (hu) fetal kidney cortex. (e) gene-level correlation of normalized mrna-seq reads between human and mouse npc profiles obtained by maris; human (orange) or mouse (cyan) enriched genes were indicated. (f) top three go terms enriched from the human (top) and mouse (bottom) enriched genes. ab, antibody; enrich., enriched; norm., normalized vs., versus.']. Reference sentences:[initially we performed control experiments using a transgenic six2gfp reporter mouse strain which labels six2+ nephron pro- genitors with nuclear gfp.3 e16.5 six2gfp-expressing kidneys were gently dissociated to release cells from the cortical nephro- genic niche and six2gfp+ and six2gfp2 cells were either directly isolated by facs or subjected to maris then transcrip- tionally profiled (figure 3a).six2gfp+ and mmaris-six2+ rna-seq datasets showed a strong correlation (r2=0.97) indicating that maris generates a comparable transcriptional profile to facs isolation of viable gfp-labeled six2+ cells (figure 3b).as expected both the six2gfp+ and mmaris-six2+ cells expressed nephron progenitor markers such as phf19 cited1 osr1 and six2 (figure 3c supplemental table 1).to profile six2+ human npcs we performed a brief cor- tical dissociation of human fetal kidneys (week 16) to release mesenchymal cell types then performed maris to isolate six2+ cells (figure 3d).overall hmaris-six2+ and mmaris-six2+ expression profiles showed a significant correlation in their gene expres- sion profiles (r2=0.61) (figure 3e).go-term analyses on the mouse-enriched genes indicated a strong upregulation of genes involved in oxidative phosphorylation and mitochon- drial function and the regulation of cell proliferation (figure 3f).the exception was fgf20/fgf20 which is predicted to be mouse figure 3.second to identify a hu- man ipc rna profile we performed maris colabeling with meis1 (foxd1 antibodies were not compatible with this pro- cedure) and six2 antibodies on preparations of cortical mes- enchyme cell–enriched human kidney isolates at weeks 13–15 (supplemental figure 3a) generating rna-seq profiles for meis1+/six22 (ipc-enriched) meis1+/six2+ (npcs) and cortex cells (supplemental figure 3b).we first contrasted genes enriched in either human or mouse ipcs (hipc and mipc) to their respective cortex rna profiles (supplemental figure 3c).]
Summary: Correlation between gene expression profiles of mouse and human nephron progenitor cells isolated by FACS and MARIS methods, with enrichment of specific genes related to cell function.

Text 205
10.1681/ASN.2017080890
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 2. nephron and interstitial progenitor markers mix and persist into epithelializing nephrons. (a and d) immunoﬂuorescent stains for cited1 and six2 in mouse and human kidneys. insert in (d) shows cited1 protein in the human rv (scale bar, 10 mm). (b, c, e, and f) quantitative analyses of signal intensity distribution for cited1 and six2. (g–l) immunoﬂuorescent analysis for foxd1 and six2 and intensity correlation plots for these. white, blue, and red dashed lines indicate ureteric bud epithelium, cap mesenchyme, and nascent nephrons, respectively. scale as indicated on fields. cm, cap mesenchyme; im, interstitial mesenchyme; n, nephron; pta, pretubular aggregate; rv, renal vesicle; ub, ureteric bud.']. Reference sentences:[these developmental stages were cho- sen for reasons discussed previously44 as they represent two stages of active nephrogenesis during and after ureteric branching.2123 in the mouse nephrogenic niche six+/cited1+ cells cluster around krt8+ ureteric epithelial branch tips (figure 2a).high six2 levels were observed in npcs and six2 was pre- sent at lower levels inanatomicallydistinct pretubular aggregates (figure 2b) whereas cited1 was restricted to npcs as predicted from in situ hybridization data (figure 2c) and previous stud- ies.41 in the human nephrogenic niche six2+/cited1+ cells were more broadly distributed around epithelial branch tips (figure 2d) with a less marked difference in six2 levels in pre- tubular aggregates (figure 2e) with detectable six2 and cited1 extending into renal vesicles (figure 2f and data not shown).analysis of foxd1 showed foxd1+ ipcs surrounding six2+ npcs in the developing mouse kidney; no foxd1 was detected in the npc population (figure 2 g–i).in the human kidney a strong foxd1+ putative ipc population surrounded six2+ npcs; however foxd1 was present in six2+ npcs (figure 2 j–l) albeit at lower levels (13% lower than in ipcs).an initial com- parison of the hmaris-six2+ rna-seq data to the previously generated itga8+ npc-enriched cell profile30 showed a good correlation (r2=0.81; supplemental figure 2a).further analysis showed the hmaris-six2+ sample displayed a higher expres- sion of nephron progenitor markers (supplemental figure 2c) and lower expression of genes expressed by differentiating cells except for pax8 or in epithelializing nephron structures (supplemental figure 2d).the hmaris-six2+ rna profile also showed minimal contamination by blood and vascular en- dothelial cell types (supplemental figure 2e) and reduced ex- pression of genes indicative of cells within the ureteric epithelium that underlies the npc niche (supplemental figure 2f).]
Correlation patterns between nephron and interstitial progenitor markers in developing kidneys.

Text 206
10.1681/ASN.2017080890
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 6. transcriptional profiling of human and mouse ipcs. (a) gene-level correlation of normalized mrna-seq reads between human (hu) ipc and npc. (b) gene-level correlation of normalized mrna-seq reads between mouse (ms) ipc and npc. (c) immunostaining of interstitial markers in mouse and human kidneys as specified on fields. (d) breakdown of mouse (top) or human (bottom) genes expressed in ipc or npc by their relative expression in the two cell types. genes enriched in one of the cell types satisfy tpm.5 and fold change .3. other expressed genes are categorized as “non-de.” (middle) pie chart shows breakdown of mouse ipcenriched genes by their relative expression between human ipc and npc. de, differentially expressed enrich., enriched; norm., normalized; ub, ureteric bud epithelium; vs., versus.']. Reference sentences:[we focused the analysis to identify genes differentially expressed between human ipcs and npcs (figure 6a).applying similar thresholding criteria as in earlier maris data 503 genes showed enriched expression in hipcs versus hnpc cell fractions (figure 6a supplemental table 4) including genes associated with extracellular matrix or matrix interactions (itga9 itga1 col3a1) transcription (gata3) and cell signaling (pdgfrb).en- richment of pdgfra pdgfrb and pbx1 within hipcs was confirmed through immunolabeling studies (figure 6c).in agreement with expression profiles pdgfra and pdgrfb were only detected in ipcs (expression extends also into likely ipc interstitial/stromal derivatives) whereas pbx1 was pre- sent in both hipcs and hnpcs but at markedly elevated levels within hipcs (figure 6c).to determine whether human orthologs of mouse ipc markers were expressed more broadly in npcs we first identified a full set of genes whose expression was enriched in mouse mipcs compared with mnpcs (figure 6b supple- mental table 5); this gave a set of 647 genes including foxd1 and meis1 and other recognizable interstitial markers.]
Summary: Differential gene expression patterns between human and mouse IPCs and NPCs, including enrichment of specific genes in IPCs.

Text 207
10.1038/s41467-018-03149-4
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 5 using scnmt-seq to explore dynamics of the epigenome during differentiation. a embryoid body cells ordered in a developmental trajectory inferred from the rna-seq data. shown is the location of each cell in pseudotime (x axis) versus the expression level of esrrb (y axis). b reconstructed dynamics of variation in chromatin accessibility profiles across the developmental trajectory. shown are profiles of representative cells for rock2 and efhd1. axis ticks display –200 bp, 0 bp and +200 bp relative to the tss. shading is used to highlight changes between cells. c developmental trajectory is associated changes in genome-wide methylation-accessibility coupling. shown is the location of each cell in pseudotime (x axis) and the corresponding pearson correlation coefficients between methylation and accessibility (y axis) in different genomic contexts']. Reference sentences:[when considering the rna-seq component dimensionality reduction17 and hierarchical cluster- ing revealed that cells cluster by condition and not by protocol (supplementary fig 5).to explore this we used the rna-seq component to reconstruct a pseudotemporal ordering of the cells from pluripotent to differentiated cell states (fig 5a methods).fig 5b depicts two representative genes: efhd1 a gene that dis- plays a transition from a state with an open transcription start site (tss) to a state with a closed tss; and rock2 with a similar transition on the +1 nucleosome after the tss.to this end we plotted methylation- accessibility correlation coefficients (as calculated in fig 2a) against pseudotime which revealed an increasing negative correlation coefficient between dna methylation and accessi- bility in practically all genomic contexts (fig 5c).accessibility profiles were constructed within each cell and gene in +/–200 bp windows around the tss (as displayed in fig 5b and supplementary fig 14 15 and 16) using a generalised linear model (glm) of basis function regression coupled with a bernoulli likelihood using bprmeth22.]
Patterns of correlation between methylation and accessibility change along a developmental trajectory in single cells.

Text 208
10.1038/s41467-018-03149-4
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 2 scnmt-seq recapitulates known global associations between molecular layers. upper panel shows an illustration of the computation of the correlation across genes (one association test per cell). left is cpg methylation and rna expression associations, middle is cpg methylation and gpc accessibility associations, and right is gpc accessibility and rna expression associations. red circles represent cpg methylation levels, blue circles represent gpc accessibility levels and yellow polya tails represent rna abundance. lower panel shows the pearson correlation coefficients between molecular layers at different genomic contexts in the esc data. box plots show the distribution of correlation coefficients in single cells. boxes display median coverage and the first and third quartile, whiskers show 1.5 × the interquartile range above and below the box. dots show the correlation coefficient in the pseudo-bulked data estimated as average across all single-cells. stars show the correlation coefficient using published bulk data from the same cell type18,19. sample size for the single-cell data is determined by the number of cells which pass qc for both layers (61–64 cells, see methods)']. Reference sentences:[we found that accessibility was increased at known dnasei hypersensitivity sites super enhancer regions and binding sites for transcription factors and other dna binding proteins (from published chip-seq data fig 1d supplementary fig 2).as a final quality assessment we analysed associations between molecular layers within individual cells (across all genes) which is similar to approaches used to investigate linkages using bulk data (see fig 2 upper panel for a graphical representation).reassuringly this confirmed the expected negative correlations for methylation with transcription12 and methylation with accessibility8 (fig 2 lower panel) and positive correlations between accessibility and expression18 (for most genomic contexts with the notable exception of active enhancers for which there is little evidence for a correlation between accessibility and expression in our data or in published data).low numbers of correlated accessibility–expression could indicate that transcriptional changes in this population are more dependent on dna methylation changes than chromatin accessibility changes and this is in agreement with the results presented in fig 2.to this end we plotted methylation- accessibility correlation coefficients (as calculated in fig 2a) against pseudotime which revealed an increasing negative correlation coefficient between dna methylation and accessi- bility in practically all genomic contexts (fig 5c).in total 68 cells passed the quality control (supplementary fig 20a).in total 46 cells passed the quality control (supplementary fig 20b).in total 64 cells out of 73 passed the quality control (supplementary fig 21a supplementary data 1).in total 40 cells passed the quality control (supplementary fig 21b supplementary data 1) all of which also passed rna-seq qc and comprised 33 scnmt-seq cells and 7 scm&t-seq cells.this choice was informed by pseudo-bulking the single-cell data and computing the correlation between accessibility/methylation and gene expression (across genes) for small 50 bp windows along the promoter finding that the strongest signal fell within our chosen range (supplementary fig 22).]
Summary: Correlations between DNA methylation, chromatin accessibility, and gene expression in single cells were analyzed, revealing expected patterns and potential regulatory relationships.

Text 209
10.1038/s41467-018-03149-4
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 3 scnmt-seq enables the discovery of novel associations at individual loci. a left panel shows an illustration for the correlation analysis across cells, which results in one association test per locus. the right panel shows the pearson correlation coefficient (x-axis) and log10 p-value (y-axis) from association tests between different molecular layers at individual loci, stratified by genomic contexts. significant associations (fdr <0.1, benjamini–hochberg adjusted), are highlighted in red. the number of significant positive (+) and negative (−) associations and the number of tests (centre) are indicated above. sample size varies depending on the number of cells, which have coverage for a specific loci (see methods). b zoom-in view of the esrrb gene locus. shown from top to bottom are: pairwise pearson correlation coefficients between each pair of the three layers (met methylation, acc accessibility, expr expression). accessibility (blue) and methylation (red) profiles shown separately for pluripotent and differentiated sub-populations; mean rates (solid line) and standard deviation (shade) were calculated using a running window of 10 kb with a step size of 1000 bp; track with genomic annotations, highlighting the position of regulatory elements: promoters, super enhancers, and p300 binding sites']. Reference sentences:[as a control we included cells which did not receive enzyme treatment (scm&t-seq controls) and these cells showed universally low gpc methylation levels (~2%) with no enrich- ment at regulatory regions indicating that the accessibility data are not affected by endogenous gpc methylation (supplementary fig 3).subsequently we tested locus-specific associations between different pairwise combinations of molecular layers (fig 3a) which is distinct from the correlations across genes used for quality control above and is enabled by parallel single-cell measurements in multiple cells.first considering associations between methylation and transcription we identified a minimum of 3 (exons) and a maximum of 47 (gene bodies) associations (fdr <0.1 fig 3a supplementary fig 11a supplementary data 2 methods).in contrast we found that associations between dna accessibility and transcription were less widespread with a small number of mostly positive associations in promoters p300 binding sites and super enhancer regions (13 associations total fdr <0.1 fig 3a supplementary fig 11b and supplementary data 2).finally for methylation-accessibility we found associations at most genomic contexts with up to 89 significant correlations (introns) and these tended to be negative as expected (fig 3a supplementary fig 11c and supplementary data 2).as an illustrative example fig 3b displays the esrrb locus a gene we find to be expressed primarily in the pluripotent cells (supplementary fig 9) and which displays a strong correlation between methylation and expression in super enhancer regions replicating previous findings3.]
Summary: Correlation analysis reveals associations between methylation, accessibility, and expression at specific loci in single cells, with varying numbers of significant positive and negative correlations.

Text 210
10.1038/s41467-018-02892-y
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 4 correlation between proportion of fibroblast subsets and synovial inﬂammation. a the spearman\'s correlation between the proportion of", \'cd34–thy1+ fibroblasts in total fibroblasts and the proportion of cd45+ cells in total live cells in synovial tissue biopsies from ra knee joints. b–d the\', \'linear correlation coefficient between the proportion of cd34–thy1+ fibroblasts and krenn inﬂammation score (b), ultrasound synovial hypertrophy\', \'score (c), and disease duration (years) (d). proportion of cells were evaluated by ﬂow cytometry. plots b–d show linear model coefficient estimates and\', \'ttest p values\']. Reference sentences:[though our sample size (n = 10) was limited we saw that the proportion of cd34–thy1+ fibroblasts is positively correlated with the proportion of infiltrated leukocytes by ﬂow cytometry (fig 4a).in addition the proportion of cd34– thy1+ fibroblasts correlated with both histological synovitis and synovial hypertrophy assessed by ultrasound (fig 4b c).in contrast the correlation between the proportion of cd34–thy1+ fibroblasts and disease duration was not observed suggesting that the altered proportion of fibroblast subsets is not a secondary effect of chronic tissue damage (fig 4d).]
Summary: Correlation between fibroblast subset proportion and synovial inflammation markers in rheumatoid arthritis.

Text 211
10.1038/s41467-018-02892-y
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['[\'fig 1 distinct protein and mrna expression between fibroblast subsets. a gating strategy for synovial fibroblasts with heterogeneous expression of\', \'surface proteins. b analysis of variance (anova) reveals 436 genes with significant (1% fdr) variation across seven gated populations that are measured\', \'and statistically significant in both microarray and rna-seq datasets. each column in the heatmap corresponds to the average of multiple samples of a cell\', \'sorting gate. each square beneath a column represents a donor from which this sample was taken. c principal component analysis (pca) with 2,986 genes\', \'(1% fdr, anova) in microarray data separates the 32 microarray samples into three subsets: cd34–thy1–, cd34–thy1+, and cd34+. d pairwise\', "pearson\'s correlation of microarrays also suggests three major subsets of fibroblasts"]. Reference sentences:[after screening many surface proteins we chose podoplanin (pdpn) and cadherin-11 (cdh11) because of their characteristic expression on fibroblasts and thy1 (also known as cd90) and cd34 for their ability to distinguish fibroblast subpopulations (fig 1a).the remaining stromal cells exhibited high protein pdpn expression consistent with fibroblasts within the synovium (fig 1a).in 42 donors (26 oa and 16 ra) we observed medians of 34.7% cd34+ and 54.7% cd34– cells (fig 1a supplementary table 1).as expected we observed that all of the samples expressed genes typically expressed in fibroblasts and lacked expression of other lineage-specific genes (supplementary fig 1a).these samples were also enriched with fibroblast lineage genes (supplementary fig 1b).in total 436 genes were measured on both platforms and had significant variation across the seven putative subpopulations in both experiments (1% fdr anova) (fig 1b).princi- pal component 1 clearly separates cd34– and cd34+ samples and pc2 separates the cd34– samples that are thy1+ and cdh11+ (fig 1c).the three subsets were also clearly apparent by hierarchical clustering on pairwise pearson's correlations of gene expression profiles (fig 1d).cd34–thy1+ sample correlations with the other samples were less consistent indicating that this subset may be more heterogeneous than the cd34– subset or the cd34+ subset (fig 1d).single fibroblasts from four additional donors (two ra and two oa) were isolated by ﬂow cytometry (ptprc– gypa– pecam1– pdpn+) followed by single-cell library gen- eration (illumina smart-seq2) (supplementary fig 1c).we selected lineage markers for fibroblast endothelial and hematopoietic cells12 and checked their expression levels to confirm that our samples are from the fibroblast lineage (supplementary fig 1).]
Summary: Correlation patterns between fibroblast subsets based on gene expression profiles.

Text 212
10.1016/j.cell.2018.02.001
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure s2. validation of the microwell-seq platform, related to figure 1 (a) reads (mapped) to a gene plot for the mes experiments using different platforms. our cj7 mes microwell-seq data were compared with a series of mes single cell data obtained using different technologies (ziegenhain et al., 2017). microwell-seq shows an advantage in the low (50000 raw reads/cell) to middle (100000 raw reads/cell) range sequencing depth. (b) number of genes detected (counts r 1) per cell for different methodologies with middle range sequencing depth (30000-60000 mapped reads/cell). double sequenced cj7 mes data were compared with a series of mes single cell data obtained using different technologies (ziegenhain et al., 2017). each dot represents a cell, and each box represents the median and first and third quartiles of replicates. (c) accuracy of scrna-seq methods. our cj7 mes microwell-seq data were compared with a series of mes single cell data obtained using different technologies (ziegenhain et al., 2017). data at low (50000 reads/cell) sequencing depth were selected for the comparison. correlations of reference gene expression values (counts per million reads for smart-seq/c1 and smart-seq2 and umis per million reads for all others) between single-cell expression and mean expression are calculated for each cell. distributions of pearson correlations (r) are shown for each method. each dot represents a cell, and each box represents the median and first and third quartiles of replicates. (d) mixed rate for the species mixing experiments using different platforms. (e) cost efficiency for different single-cell rna-seq methodologies. (f) heatmap of 4323 thawed mpb cd34+ and mpb cd34- cells. cd34+ and cd34- cells were clearly clustered into two mega groups. various subclusters can be observed in the cd34+ and cd34- mega groups. (g) thawed mpb cd34+ cells from batch 1 (b1) and batch 2 (b2) are visualized on a t-sne map.']. Reference sentences:[]
Summary: Correlations of gene expression values between single cells and mean expression were compared across different single-cell RNA-seq methodologies.

Text 213
10.1016/j.ajhg.2018.02.001
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 4. genetic markers and gene modules reveal context-specific sn da biology (a) reference atlas diagram from the allen brain atlas (aba) of the p56 mouse ventral midbrain. important abbreviations include: vta, ventral tegmental area; snc, substantia nigra pars compacta; snr, substantia nigra pars reticulata. (b) confirmation of sn da neuron marker genes through the use of aba in situ hybridization data. coronal, p56 mouse in situ data were explored in order to confirm the expression of 25 previously uncharacterized sn markers. th expression in p56 mice was used as an anatomical reference during analysis. (c) correlation heatmap of the pearson correlation between module eigengenes and p7 thþ subset cluster identity. modules are represented by their assigned colors at the bottom of the matrix. modules that had a positive correlation with a subset cluster and had a correlation p value less than the bonferroni corrected significance level (p < 3.5 3 10à4) contain an asterisk. sn cluster (p7.mb.4) identity is denoted by a black rectangle. modules (‘‘green’’ and ‘‘brown’’) that were enriched for the ‘‘parkinson’s disease’’ kegg gene set are labeled with ‘‘pd.’’ (d) the eigengene value for each p7 neuron in the seven wgcna modules shown to be significantly positively associated with a subset cluster overlaid on the t-sne plot of all p7 neurons (figure 2a). plotting of eigengenes confirms strict spatial restriction of module association. only the ‘‘lightcyan’’ module does not seem to show robust spatial restriction.']. Reference sentences:[the image used in figure 4a was obtained from the reference atlas at the al- len brain atlas.urls for all allen brain atlas in situ data analyzed and downloaded for sn marker genes (figure 4b) are available in table s5.by calculating pairwise correlations between modules and p7 subset cluster identity we reveal that 7/16 mod- ules are significantly and positively correlated (bonferroni corrected p < 3.5 3 10=4) with at least one subset cluster (figure 4c).the american journal of human genetics 102 427–446 march 1 2018 435 for ‘‘lightcyan’’ displayed robust spatial isotype enrich- ment (figure 4d).two modules the ‘‘brown’’ and ‘‘green’’ mod- ules were significantly associated with the parkinson dis- ease kegg pathway gene set (figure 4c; table s7).interest- ingly the ‘‘brown’’ module was also significantly correlated with the p7 vta population (p7.mb.1) and enriched for addiction gene sets (table s7) highlighting the link be- tween vta da neurons and addiction.66 strikingly only the p7 sn cluster was significantly correlated with both pd-enriched modules (figure 4c).in order to prioritize likely disease-associated genes in the remaining 46 loci we scored genes on three criteria: whether genes were identified as specific markers for the p7.mb.4 (sn) cluster (table s2) whether the genes were differentially expressed between all p7 da neuron figure 4.]
Patterns of correlation between gene modules and cell subsets, with specific modules associated with Parkinson's disease gene sets and spatial restrictions.

Text 214
10.1038/nature25999
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 3e, supplementary table 4), whereas a second group of branches (precursor state 2) expressed known projection neuron marker genes (isl1, ebf1; fig 3e, supplementary table 4). the third group of branches (precursor state 3) exhibited weaker correlation across eminences, with the transcription factor lhx8 representing a marker gene for the mge']. Reference sentences:[]
Summary: Correlation patterns of marker genes in different cell states.

Text 215
10.1038/nature25999
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 3 | postmitotic cells from all eminences pass through distinct precursor states. a, multidimensional scaling (mds) based on the average distance along bootstrapped minimum spanning trees. b, minimum spanning tree traversal assigned cells to the trunk and one of three branches. c, quantitative contributions of cells per branch plotted for each ganglionic eminence. d, hierarchical clustering of branch gene expression correlation. gene expression was averaged for cells from the same ganglionic eminence and branch. e, heat map depicting the top transcriptomic markers for each branch. f, co-localization of ai9 from lhx8-cre;ai9 mice with, from left to right, choline acetyltransferase (chat) in the striatum, medial septum, and nucleus basalis, and pvalb in the globus pallidus. scale bars, 300μm. g, percentage of total chat+ cells labelled with tdtomato in lhx8-cre;ai9 mice. n=15 brain sections (striatum), n=4 (medial septum), n=8 (nucleus basalis); 2 mice. h, the percentage of total pvalb+ cells labelled with tdtomato in lhx8-cre;ai9']. Reference sentences:[in situ hybridization (ish) confirmed that these waves describe the sequential expression of stem-cell (for example nes) proneural (for example ascl1) and neuro genic genes (for example dcx) approximately correlating with the spatiotempo- ral progression from the ventricular zone to the mantle zone (fig 2c extended data fig 3).to detect the potential fate divergence of cells along the maturation trajectory we bootstrapped the construction of a minimum spanning tree18 (fig 3a supplementary methods) and summarized the com- bined result using multidimensional scaling.we first observed evidence of clear fate bifurcations as cells become postmitotic and precursors from all ganglionic eminences branched into distinct precursor states (fig 3b supplementary methods).we assigned cells to branches by traversing the final minimum spanning tree and annotating major splits (fig 3b c).notably even though branched trajectories for each eminence were calculated inde- pendently branch gene expression markers were highly correlated across eminences (fig 3d e).one group of highly correlated branches (precursor state 1) expressed known regulators of interneuron development (arx maf; fig 3e supplementary table 4) whereas a second group of branches (precursor state 2) expressed known projection neuron marker genes (isl1 ebf1; fig 3e supplementary table 4).the third group of branches (precursor state 3) exhibited weaker correlation across eminences with the transcription factor lhx8 representing a marker gene for the mge branch 3 (fig 3e).genetic fate-mapping using lhx8-cre suggested that neurons within this branch account for the majority if not all of the cholinergic projection (nucleus basalis medial septum) and cholinergic interneuron (striatum) populations as well as the majority of parvalbu- min (pvalb)-positive projection neurons in the globus pallidus56 (fig 3f–h extended data fig 4g).using a correlation-based distance metric (supplementary methods) we found that as expected20 more than 80% of dlx6a-cre fate-mapped cortical cells at e18.5 were assigned to precursor state 1 on the basis of their expression of canonical regulators of interneuron development (fig 3i extended data fig 5).the remaining dlx6a-cre fate-mapped cortical population were assigned to precursor states 2 and 3 (fig 3i branch 1 branch 2 branch 3 trunk mge.1 cge.1 lge.1 mge.2 cge.2 lge.2 lge.3 cge.3 mge.3 mge.1 cge.1 lge.1 mge.2 cge.2 lge.2 lge.3 cge.3 mge.3 ndn dnm3 enc1 zic1 lhx8 tshz2 six3 pou3f1 mpped2 meis2 gucy1a1 ezr ccnd2 islr2 isl1 rgs2 gap43 cntnap2 uchl1 foxp1 nefm hs6st2 ebf1 sox2 zeb2 nrep epha5 sst npy maf tcf4 id4 cge.1 lge.1 mge.1 cge.2 lge.2 mge.2 cge.3 lge.3 mge.3 1.5 –1.5 lhx8-cre fate-mapping of branch 3 precursor cells ai9 chat ai9 chat ai9 chat ai9 pvalb d e cge lge mge eminence branch e13 postmitotic branch 1 e18.5 cortex e13 mitotic 1 2 3 1 2 3 branch ccs emin umis per cell reads per cell mapped branch striatum g. pallidus cortex striatum m. septum n. basalis g h i j k 0 25 50 75 100 total chat+ cells (%) f mds coordinate 1 0 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 distance from root 0 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 cell fraction c pearson correlation 1 –1 0 row-scaled avg.comparison of the expression profiles of cor- tical interneuron precursors (precursor state 1) from the mge and cge revealed differentially expressed genes the expression patterns of which are largely maintained in the cortex at later time points (fig 3k).consistently branching trajectories represented the most important source of variation in these cells with an increasing contribution attrib- utable to eminence of origin compared to mitotic progenitors (fig 3j).we wanted to identify genes that were differentially expressed in the early mitotic cells between the eminences (fig 2a supplementary table 3) and also between cells assigned to different branches (fig 3e supplementary table 4).detailed results are shown in extended data fig 5 and fig 3i.article research extended data figure 3 | enrichment of dynamically expressed genes in the ventricular zone subventricular zone and mantle zone.we repeated the branch analysis previously computed on postmitotic cells (fig 3a) on mitotic progenitors from all three ganglionic eminences.n analogous to fig 3e but also including the lhx6–gfp-positive and lhx6–gfp-negative datasets generated using 10x genomics as a validation of the original drop-seq datasets that were performed on wild-type mice.]
Summary: Correlation-based patterns in gene expression across distinct precursor states in single cells from different eminences.

Text 216
10.1186/s13059-018-1416-2
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 6 epithelial, mesenchymal, and stemness scores of cells sampled from intestine, liver, lung, and skin. a scatterplots showing the epithelial and mesenchymal scores for cells sampled from intestine, liver, lung, and skin. organs are indicated by colors, and cell types are indicated by shapes. the x-axis represents the epithelial score, and the y-axis represents the mesenchymal score. b scatterplots showing the changes in epithelial, mesenchymal, and stemness scores for epithelial cells sampled from intestine, liver, lung, and skin during development, as inferred by pc1 in fig 3a. the pearson correlation coefficient between each score and pc1 is calculated']. Reference sentences:[genome biology (2018) 19:31 page 8 of 20 we did see clear patterns (fig 6b).this might be one of the reasons why the intestine and liver possessed similar e- and m-score patterns during development as shown in fig 6b.for cdh2 fn1 and a b fig 6 epithelial mesenchymal and stemness scores of cells sampled from intestine liver lung and skin.indeed we did see that the stemness score had a positive correlation with the e- and m-scores (fig 6b).]
Summary: Correlation between stemness score and epithelial/mesenchymal scores in cells from different organs during development.

Text 217
10.7554/eLife.29312
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 6. single-cell transcriptomics analysis reveals the transcriptional networks involved in pre-hspcs generation. (a) network built from gene correlations. gpr56 is highlighted with a red asterisk. (b) centrality values for all the genes containing a heptad peak within 1 kb of the tss that are significantly above the median. gpr56 is highlighted with a red asterisk. (c) the upper part shows the chip-seq data for the seven tfs from the wilson et al. (2010) study in the gpr56 locus. the y-axis shows reads displayed as density plots, which were generated by wilson et al. (2010) and visualized using the integrated genome browser software. the two putative enhancers are highlighted with red rectangles. the lower part shows the results of the transcriptional reporter assay for two potential heptad enhancers in gpr56 locus using i8tfs escs treated for 24 hr with doxycycline. error bars represent standard deviations (n = 3). see also figure 6—figure supplement 1 and supplementary file 11. doi: https://doi.org/10.7554/elife.29312.022 the following figure supplement is available for figure 6:']. Reference sentences:[the experimental design whereby cells were mixed and loaded onto one chip minimized the technical variability that would invariably arise from using two separate chips (figure 6—figure supplement 1a).to determine which cells were exposed to dox we used the expres- sion of the transgene (figure 6—figure supplement 1b).a pca of the sequencing data showed that cells expressing high levels of the 8tfs transcripts clustered separately from those expressing low levels of these transcripts (figure 6—figure supplement 1c).when visualizing the resulting network we only plotted the seeds that interacted with at least with one other seed (black lines) and the gene targets of at least two seed interactions (figure 6a).several of the genes that were identified as tar- gets of the seed genes were also known from the literature; for example gpr56 which was upregu- lated in our microarray experiment after dox treatment (figure 3—figure supplement 4c) and figure 6.to identify the most important genes in the network we calculated three different centrality measures (degree betweenness and eigen) (figure 6b).as grp56 appeared as a top candidate in our two network analyses we chose it for further experiments (figure 6c).chip-seq data (wilson et al. 2010) show that there are two gpr56 regulatory elements bound by seven out of the eight tfs in the hpc7 cell line (figure 6c).a gene reporter assay in the i8tfs esc line demonstrated that the induction of the eight tfs led to a strong increase in luciferase gene expression with the two grp56 enhancers (figure 6c).we generated a network using the same seeds as before (figure 6a) and the most striking feature of the new network is that fli1 and runx1 share several targets but with opposing directions of correlation (figure 7a).]
Patterns of gene correlations and centrality values in single cells, with a focus on the gene GPR56.

Text 218
10.7554/eLife.29312
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 7. single-cell transcriptome analysis suggests that runx1 and fli1 have opposite functions during eht. (a) network built from gene correlations found in the peirera dataset (pereira et al., 2016). (b) heatmap displaying spearman correlations between the 210 genes found to be correlated to runx1 and fli1. the hierarchical clustering analysis gave us three groups of genes highlighted by three rectangles of different colors. the top go term for each group of genes is indicated. see also figure 7—figure supplement 1 and supplementary file 9. figure 7 continued on next page']. Reference sentences:[we generated a network using the same seeds as before (figure 6a) and the most striking feature of the new network is that fli1 and runx1 share several targets but with opposing directions of correlation (figure 7a).a genome-wide network analysis based on spearman correlations showed a similar pattern in which 210 genes were correlated to both fli1 and runx1 but in opposite directions (figure 7b and supplementary file 9).furthermore go analysis revealed that genes whose expression is positively correlated with fli1 and negatively correlated with runx1 (yellow rectangle) are enriched for the terms vascular development angiogen- esis and cell migration (figure 7—figure supplement 1a).on the other hand genes whose expres- sion is positively correlated with that of runx1 and negatively correlated with that of fli1 (green rectangle) are associated with the go term immune system process (figure 7—figure supplement 1a).(2010) showed that 77 out of the 210 are direct targets of both runx1 and fli1 (figure 7—figure supplement 1b and supplementary file 9).there is indeed a clear shift in the relative expression of fli1 compared to that of runx1 between the two cellular stages (figure 7—figure supplement 1c).figure 7 continued on next page bergiers et al.in addition this network suggests that gata2 and lmo2 might act as cooperative co- regulators with runx1 and fli1 respectively (figure 7a).(related to figure 7.)results of the spearman correlation analysis shown in figure 7b.the first worksheet contains all correlation values shown in the heatmap of figure 7b.(related to all figures except figure 7 and figure 7—figure supplement 1.)]
Opposite correlations between genes runx1 and fli1 in single-cell transcriptome analysis, leading to distinct gene expression patterns related to different biological processes.

Text 219
10.1038/s41588-018-0089-9
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 1 | cis-eqtl analysis in single-cell rna-seq data. a, effect size of the cis-eqtls detected in the bulk-like pbmc scrna-seq sample in which the analysis was confined to previously reported cis-eqtls in (top) wholeblood deepsage or (bottom) bulk rna-seq data. the numbers and percentages represent, respectively, the detected cis-eqtls and their concordance (i.e., same allelic direction, blue quadrants) between the bulk-like pbmc population scrna-seq eqtls and (top) the whole-blood deepsage or (bottom) bulk rna-seq data. the size of each dot represents the mean expression of the cisregulated gene in the total scrna-seq dataset. b, examples of undetectable cis-eqtls in the bulk-like pbmc population caused by (top) masking of the ciseqtl present in cd4+ t cells but absent in dendritic cells (dcs) with comparatively high expression of the cis-regulated gene or (bottom) opposite allelic effects in cd4+ t and natural killer (nk) cells. c, spearman’s rank correlation coefficient for cmonocytes against ncmonocytes of all top eqtls that were identified in the total dataset or in at least one (sub)cell cluster (see supplementary table 2). significant correlations are shown in black (four red highlighted examples are shown in d and e); nonsignificant correlations are in gray. d, cis-eqtls specifically affecting expression in cmonocytes and not ncmonocytes. e, cis-eqtls significantly affecting expression in both cmonocytes and ncmonocytes. each dot represents the mean expression of the eqtl gene in a donor. box plots show the median, first and third quartiles, and 1.5×the interquartile range. r, spearman’s rank correlation coefficient; fdr ≤ 0.05.']. Reference sentences:[after quality control (methods and supplementary fig 1) we first assessed the extent to which previously reported cis-eqtls from bulk whole blood using either 94 deepsage samples15 (a 3′ -end-oriented rna-sequencing strategy similar to our scrna- seq approach) or 2116 rna-seq11 samples also show significant effects in the scrna-seq dataset.we detected 50 and 311 significant cis-eqtls (gene-level false-discovery rate (fdr) of 0.05) that were previously reported in the deepsage15 and rna-seq11 study respectively (fig 1a and supplementary table 1).however this effect was not significant in the bulk-like pbmcs (p = 0.88) because tspan13 is lowly expressed in cd4+ t cells whereas it is highly expressed in dendritic cells where it did not show a cis-eqtl effect (fig 1b).nevertheless in cd4+ t cells the a allele of rs4804315 significantly decreased expression of znf414 in cis (p = 6.09 × 10−6) whereas in natural killer cells this allele increased expression of znf414 at nominal significance (p = 0.0339; fig 1b).when plotting spearman’s rank correlation of each top eqtl for cmonocytes against that for ncmonocytes several examples were identified that pinpointed the eqtl effect specifi- cally to cmonocytes (fig 1c).two such examples which were pre- viously identified in rna-seq data of purified cd14+ monocytes17 are shown in fig 1d.the scrna-seq data now allowed us to spe- cifically assign these effects to cmonocytes (fig 1d).despite hav- ing lower power for detecting eqtls in ncmonocytes due to an abundance almost five times lower compared to cmonocytes (supplementary fig 2b) power in the ncmonocytes remains suf- ficiently high to detect several other significant ncmonocyte cis- eqtls (fig 1e and supplementary table 2).further details of the algorithm can be found in kang et al.33 using the demuxlet algorithm we could confidently assign the majority (99.8%) of cells to one of the individual donors (singlets) or to two different donors (doublets) (supplementary fig 1a and supplementary table 5).cells belonging to a female donor showed (almost) no y-reads (mismapping reads34 may explain the few sporadic y-reads) whereas the majority of cells from male donors did (supplementary fig 1b).also cells expressing > 3500 genes were considered outliers and discarded (supplementary fig 1c and supplementary table 6).supplementary fig 1d shows a t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding (t-sne) plot36 in which all cells failing the above qcs are visualized.]
Patterns related to correlation between cis-eqtls and gene expression in different cell types are shown. Significant correlations and cell-specific effects are highlighted.

Text 220
10.1038/s41588-018-0089-9
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 2 | most significant co-expression qtl in the cd4+ t cells. a, the nonimputed expression of rps26 and rpl21 of all individual cd4+ t cells colored by genotype (left panel) and stratified per snp rs7297175 genotype (right panels). genotype- and donor-specific regression lines are shown in the left and right panels, respectively. each data point represents a single cell. the nominal p value is given for the co-expression qtl. b, the spearman’s rank correlation coefficient (r) between rps26 and rpl21 expression, stratified by snp rs7297175 genotype in the cd4+ t cells per donor. each data point represents a single donor. box plots show the median, first and third quartiles, and 1.5×the interquartile range. the nominal p value is given for the coexpression qtl. c, the imputed expression of rps26 and rpl21 of all individual cd4+ t cells colored by genotype (left panel) and stratified per snp rs7297175 genotype (right panels). genotype- and donor-specific regression lines are shown in the left and right panel, respectively. each data point represents a single cell. d, the expression of rps26 and rpl21 in wholeblood bulk rna-seq samples, colored by snp rs7297175 genotype. genotypespecific regression lines are shown. each data point represents a single bulk rna-seq sample. the nominal p value is given for the interaction effect.']. Reference sentences:[separate cis-eqtl analyses were conducted on each of the identified major cell types (cell type classi- fication was performed using seurat16; supplementary fig 2ab) by averaging the normalized gene expression of all cells per cell type gene and donor.we could not study this in detail due to lack of power given the sample size and limited number of cells for rare cell types (supplementary fig 2c).despite hav- ing lower power for detecting eqtls in ncmonocytes due to an abundance almost five times lower compared to cmonocytes (supplementary fig 2b) power in the ncmonocytes remains suf- ficiently high to detect several other significant ncmonocyte cis- eqtls (fig 1e and supplementary table 2).the most significant interaction was found for rs7297175 affecting the co-expression between rps26 and rpl21 (p = 2.70 × 10−16; fig 2ab).of the three eqtl genes that were involved in a co-expression qtl two of three top co-expression qtls— rs7297175 (affecting the co-expression between rps26 and rpl21 p = 3.97 × 10−12; fig 2c) and rs4147641 (affecting the co-expression between smdt1 and rps3a p = 2.57 × 10−4)—remained after imputation (supplementary table 4).subsequently we were able to replicate both effects in a wholeblood bulk rna-seq eqtl data- set11 (p = 1.69 × 10−3 for rps26–rpl21 (fig 2d) p = 1.59 × 10−4 for smdt1–rps3a; supplementary table 4).based on known marker genes and differentially expressed genes per cluster (found using seurat’s findmarkers function) we could assign 11 cell types to the clusters including some smaller cell subtypes (supplementary fig 2ab and supplementary table 7).moreover for the eqtls that were specifically detected in cmonocytes and not ncmonocytes (fig 2d) detection rates and concordances were determined using the rna-seq data of the purified cd14+ monocytes from the blueprint consortium17.]
Patterns of correlation between gene expressions in CD4+ T cells, influenced by SNP rs7297175, were analyzed. The most significant co-expression QTL was found.

Text 221
10.1038/s41467-018-03538-9
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 2 histone modifications and gene expression in adult mda neurons. a h3k27me3 and h3k9me3 abundance around tss is inversely correlated with h3k4me3 abundance: heatmaps showing genome-wide abundance of h3k27me3, h3k4me3, and h3k9me3 ± 10 kb around tss of individual genes in mda neurons as rpkms obtained by chip-seq. heatmaps were sorted for descending h3k27me3 abundance. b categorization of tss regions into chromatin states: heatmap profiles of average h3k27me3, h3k4me3, and h3k9me3 rpkms ± 10 kb around tss of genes per defined chromatin state in mda neurons (denoted as k27, k4, k4/k27, k4/k9, k4/k9/k27, k9, k9/k27, and none, respectively). c individual chromatin states are associated with different levels of gene expression: box-plots showing the expression levels (log2(rpkm + 1)) of genes in the different chromatin-state categories. the center line is the median, bounds are the 25th and 75th percentiles, and whiskers are ±1.5 iqr. chromatin states with an average gene expression that is different compared to the global average gene expression are indicated by p-values obtained by a two-sided wilcoxon rank-sum test. d genome-wide relative abundance of chip-seq defined chromatin states in promoter regions ±10 kb around tss in mda neurons. e ucsc genome browser excerpts  showing examples of enrichment for h3k27me3 (gray, vertical scale 0–100 rpkm), h3k4me3 (red, vertical scale 0–160 rpkm), and h3k9me3 (blue, vertical scale 0–80 rpkm) at representative genes per chromatin state in mda neurons. each plot spans 20 kb']. Reference sentences:[facs analysis of the total extracted mouse midbrain nuclei from datcreert2-rpl10a-mcherrymice showed a distinct mcherry- positive population not present in wild-type mice (fig 1b sup- plementary figure 2).the abundance of h3k27me3 and h3k9me3 in the promoter region ±10 kb around transcription start sites (tss) of genes was inversely correlated with enrichment of h3k4me3 (fig 2a).to visualize the distribution of enrich- ment of each modification within promoter regions we generated average profiles of read coverage for each chromatin state (fig 2b).this pattern suggests that genes within the k4/k27 state may contain a subset of genes with bivalent promoters (fig 2be) as previously reported for other types of adult neurons12.we noted that the read density of h3k9me3 was strongly enriched in the k9 and k9/k27 states and less prominent in the k4/k9 and k4/k9/k27 states (fig 2be).this revealed that genes belonging to the k4 state displayed a significantly higher average expression whereas genes belonging to the other states had a lower average expression (fig 2c).co- occurrence of h3k4me3 and repressive modifications generally correlated with a higher level of transcription compared to genes belonging to states with repressive modifications only (fig 2c).genome-wide the k4 state was the most abundant (fig 2bd).notably the examined repressive histone modifications rarely occurred alone without the simultaneous presence of h3k4me3 and/or h3k27me3/h3k9me3 (fig 2bd).h3k27me3 was for instance more centered at tss when co-occurring with h3k4me3 in the k4/k27 state whereas h3k27me3 was covering the entire region when co-occurring with h3k9me3 in the k9/k27 state and that these differences were reﬂected in cell-type transitions gene identity and gene-expression levels (fig 2b supplementary figures 6b and 8b).]
Correlation between histone modifications and gene expression levels in single cells.

Text 222
10.1038/s41467-018-03538-9
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 1 purification of adult neuronal and neural progenitor nuclei. a rpl10a-mcherry expression (red) overlaps th (green) expression in the ventral midbrain in datcreert2-rpl10a-mcherry mice. 5x and 20x magnification. to the left is an in situ hybridization for slc6a3 taken from the allen brain atlas (mouse. brain-map.org, image credit: allen institute), indicating the position of the images. scale bars: 200 μm (upper panels), 50 μm (lower panels). b facs plots showing a population of nuclei, indicated by “p5,” occurring in datcreert2-rpl10a-mcherry mice but not in wild-type mice. single-nuclei rna-seq: c pcaplots constructed from normalized single-nuclei log-expression values of correlated hvgs. each nucleus is colored according to the expression of slc6a3, th, or ret. arrows indicate three outlier nuclei identified as originating from non-mda neurons. a total of 1000 nuclei bulk rna-seq: d heatmap showing sample-to-sample distances between hierarchically clustered mda, ser, and npc rna-seq libraries. e expression of dopaminergic neuron markers is restricted to mda nuclei: bars indicate average rpkm ± sd for slc6a3 and th as rpkms in mda (n = 4 mice), ser (n = 3 mice), and npc nuclei (n = 3 embryos). f expression of serotonergic markers is restricted to ser nuclei: bars indicate average rpkm ± sd for slc6a4 and tph2 as rpkms in mda, ser, and npc nuclei. g expression of neural progenitor markers is restricted to npc nuclei: bars indicate average rpkm ± sd for sox2 and nes as rpkms in mda, ser, and npc nuclei. significance for e–g according to two-tailed student’s t-test assuming equal variances. p ≤ 0.001, p ≤ 0.01']. Reference sentences:[the spe- cificity of rpl10a-mcherry expression was confirmed by co- localization of the dopamine cell-specific marker tyrosine hydroxylase (th) in coronal midbrain sections of datcreert2- rpl10a-mcherry mice (fig 1a).the overlap between mcherry and tryptophan hydroxylase 2 (tph2) a marker for serotonin- producing neurons was confirmed in hindbrain sections from sert-cre-rpl10a-mcherry mice (supplementary figure 1a).facs analysis of the total extracted mouse midbrain nuclei from datcreert2-rpl10a-mcherrymice showed a distinct mcherry- positive population not present in wild-type mice (fig 1b sup- plementary figure 2).principal component analysis (pca) of normalized log-expression values of correlated highly variable genes (methods) revealed three nuclei as outliers that were also distinguished by absent or low expression of key dopaminergic marker genes including th slc6a3 (dopamine transporter dat) and ret (fig 1c and supplementary figure 3a).clustering analysis27 showed as expected that adult neuronal populations (mda ser) were more similar to each other compared to npcs (fig 1d).dopaminergic markers were specifically detected in the mda nuclei serotonergic markers were specifically detected in ser nuclei and markers for npcs were restricted to npc nuclei (fig 1e–g).we also confirmed that progenitors giving rise to mda and ser neurons were represented within the population of sorted npcs as the npc population expressed gata3 a marker for serotonergic progeni- tors continuously expressed in ser neurons as well as lmx1a a marker for dopaminergic progenitors continuously expressed in mda neurons (supplementary figure 1c).loss of th+-cells was confirmed in the lesioned hemisphere (sup- plementary figure 10a–c).gene expression differences in mda neurons between intact and lesioned hemispheres were assessed by trap-seq (supplementary figure 11ab methods).gene expression changes were then assessed by trap-seq in the same way as for 6-ohda (supplementary figure 11cd).k4 enrichment was significantly higher near hrk compared to near the hoxa2 tss and k27 enrichment was significantly higher compared to near the tbp tss (supplementary fig 11fh).instead there was a strong enrichment of k4 marked genes (supplementary fig 12a–f).the sorting strategy was confirmed to separate single nuclei from duplets/ triplets: purified nuclei from adult mouse cortex were incubated with an alexa 647- labeled antibody against the pan-neuronal marker neun (millipore mab377) and sorted in large numbers according to our gating strategy with the addition of dapi to quantify dna content per event (supplementary figure 13).library and mapping quality was assessed by analysis of cumulative gene assignment diversity and gene-body cov- erage (supplementary figure 14) using the qorts package54.we also removed nuclei where the log-transformed number of expressed genes was three mads below the median (supplementary figure 16ab).library and mapping quality was assessed by analysis of cumulative gene assignment diversity and gene-body coverage (supplementary figure 14e–h) using the qorts package54.next to improve statistical interference low- abundance genes with an average count below a filter threshold of 1 were removed resulting in 12235 genes remaining in the analysis (supplementary figure 16c).the obtained size factors were tightly correlated with the library sizes for all nuclei (supplementary figure 16d) and the counts were sub- sequently normalized against these.to identify highly variable genes (hvgs60) a mean-variance trend was fitted against the variance of each gene using a loess curve with span set to 0.03 (supplementary figure 16e).hvgs were then defined as genes with a biological component of variance that were significantly equal or greater than 0.5 at a false-discovery rate (fdr) of 5% (supplementary figure 16f).to detect bursting vs. non-bursting genes the individual rpkms for a number of mda- neuron-specific genes and the mcherry gene in single cells were plotted against the rpkms for slc6a3 for that particular cell (supplementary figure 17a–h).the outcome was compared with results obtained from using pooled libraries with the same parameter settings (supplementary figure 18a–c).this showed that mcherry as well as mda-specific genes including slc6a3 and th were highly enriched in the trap-fraction whereas markers for other cell types including gfap (astrocytes) hexb (microglia) mbp (oligodendrocytes) or slc6a4 (ser neurons) were not enriched (supplementary figure 11a).to identify genes that changed expression in mda neurons we (1) compared differentially expressed genes between the lesioned and unlesioned hemispheres in the trap-fractions and (2) subtracted differentially expressed genes in the corresponding ub fractions that (3) were not enriched in trap compared to ub (supplementary figure 11b).]
Patterns related to correlation between gene expressions in different cell types were observed, with specific markers restricted to respective cell populations.

Text 223
10.1038/s41551-018-0219-9
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 4 | chs alter the correlation of gene expression profiles in 3d co-cultured human in cells to the human brain developmental transcriptome and tune the expression levels of individual neuronal genes with varying amounts of crosslinker. a, relative expression of neuronal genes as a function of increasing amounts of the crs cacl2 (1x, 3.125mm; 2x, 6.25mm; 4x, 12.5mm; 8x, 25mm) in the chs (see also supplementary fig 10). differential expression was performed between co-cultures in chs with 2x, 4x or 8x crs and co-culture in a ch with 1x crs, with p<0.05 and log2 (fold change) <−0.75 or log2 (fold change)>0.75 used as the cut-off values. b, pearson’s correlation analysis of rna-seq data of co-cultured human in cells in matrigel and chs with varying amounts of crs compared with human brain transcriptome data of four different subregions (v1c, dfc, a1c and m1c) at four fetal developmental stages (12, 16, 19 and 37 pcw). bars show the mean correlation±s.e.m.']. Reference sentences:[the 3d cultures of in cells showed an increased expres- sion of a number of genes involved in channel activity and we found that these cells unlike their 2d counterparts were capa- ble of firing repetitive action potentials and displayed spontane- ous excitatory postsynaptic currents (supplementary fig 4).articles nature biomedical engineering we focused on differentially expressed genes involved in forebrain development axon guidance and neuron development biological processes (fig 4a supplementary fig 10).neuronal transcripts such as dlg4 nfib and unc5c were expressed at lower levels in in cells co-cultured in chs with high levels of crosslinker than in in cells co-cultured in other chs (fig 4a supplementary fig 10).articles nature biomedical engineering in in cells co-cultured in chs with low or high levels crosslinker (fig 4a supplementary fig 10).for all four subregions tested we observed a positive trend in the correlation between the transcriptome of co-cultured in cells to the human brain transcriptome at later developmental time points (19 pcw and 37 pcw) when moving from matrigel to chs with increasing levels of crosslinker (fig 4b).]
Patterns of gene expression correlations between single cells and human brain transcriptome vary with crosslinker levels.

Text 224
10.1038/s41551-018-0219-9
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 2 | incorporating ha within matrigel leads to enriched non-neuronal biological processes in 3d co-cultured human in cells and decreases the gene expression correlation to the human brain developmental transcriptome. a, schematic showing human in cells and mouse astrocytes (at a concentration of 30×106 cells ml–1) encapsulated in matrigel with or without ha trapped within the matrigel. b, pca of gene expression values derived from whole transcriptome sequencing data of 3d co-cultured in cells in matrigel with or without ha at week 5 of culture (n=3 for each condition). c, gene expression clusters for in cells co-cultured in matrigel with or without ha. two clusters, labelled 1 and 2, were identified (see also supplementary table 4). go terms for genes in each cluster are shown. differentially expressed genes with p<0.01 and log2 (fold change)<−1 or log2 (fold change)>1 were used. d, pearson’s correlation between rna-seq data of in cells with or without ha at week 5 and human brain transcriptome data of four different subregions (v1c, dfc, a1c and m1c) at four fetal developmental stages (12, 16, 19 and 37 pcw) from the brainspan database . bars show the mean correlation±s.e.m.']. Reference sentences:[gene set enrichment analysis (gsea) showed more enriched neuro- logical processes present in 3d cultured in cells than in 2d ones at 5 weeks whereas 2d cultures were enriched for apopto- sis and oxidative stress markers indicative of their poor health (supplementary fig 2a).we validated a subset of these genes by quantitative pcr (qpcr) (supplementary fig 2b).we incorporated high molecular mass (~1.5–1.8 × 106 da) ha at two different concentrations in our tissue system (fig 2a) and then performed bulk rna-seq at 5 weeks.the presence of ha resulted in significant differences in the transcrip- tome of in cells (fig 2b).gsea and go analysis showed that cells cultured in the absence of ha were enriched for neurological pro- cesses whereas cells cultured in the presence of ha were enriched in non-neuronal biological processes (fig 2c supplementary fig 7a supplementary table 4).we found that the presence of ha broadly decreased the correlation between the transcriptome of 3d co-cultured in cells to the human brain devel- opmental transcriptome although correlations to 37 pcw did not fit this trend (fig 2d).we performed clustering on scrna-seq profiles of human cells in both 3d co-cultures and identified 12 clusters (fig 7a supplementary fig 20a).using various cell-type marker genes (supplementary fig 20b–d) we classified the cell types into the following five main clusters: neurons astrocytes inhibitory neurons rg and neuro- epithelia (fig 7b).although we observed some expression of marker genes for ipcs the transcriptomic correlation of our neu- ron cluster to neurons in the fetal human cortex was higher than its correlation to ipcs in the fetal human cortex (fig 7de supplementary fig 20e 21ab).moreover our neuron clus- ter showed a high transcriptomic correlation to different types of excitatory neurons in the fetal human cortex data such as early- and late-born excitatory neurons in the primary visual cortex (en-v1-2) and prefrontal cortex (en-pfc2) and in the adult human brain (fig 7df supplementary fig 20f 21ab).in addi- tion the gene expression profile of our rg cluster correlated more with rg in the fetal human cortex such as early rg (rg-early) dividing rg (rg-div2) and medial ganglionic eminence rg (mge-rg2) which can give rise to inhibitory neurons39 (fig 7de supplementary fig 20e 21ab).our inhibitory neuron cluster transcriptionally correlated with both inhibitory neuron types (such as in-ctx-mge1; mge-derived cortex inhibitory neu- rons) and excitatory neuron types identified in the fetal human cortex (fig 7d supplementary fig 21ab).by contrast in the adult human brain the inhibitory neuron cluster correlated most highly with inhibitory neurons (fig 7f supplementary fig 20f).similarly although our astrocyte cluster correlated more highly with rg than with astrocytes in the fetal human cortex (fig 7d supplementary fig 21ab) its transcriptome correlation with astrocytes in the adult human brain was higher than its correlation to other cell types (fig 7f supplementary fig 20f).articles nature biomedical engineering (supplementary fig 21c).the top nine astrocyte-specific genes and the top nine rg-specific genes based on log fold-change (supplementary fig 21d) were identified.we identified insertions and deletions (indels) in three independently targeted loci and found ~5% ~14% and ~6% indel formation in sod1 tardbp and tbk1 respectively (see supplementary text supplementary fig 22 23).bc a tsne plot showing identified clusters of distinct cell types with cells coloured by cluster membership (b) and number of cells in each cell type for each condition for scrna- seq profiles shown in a (see also supplementary fig 20) (c).d pearson’s correlations between the average gene expression in cell type clusters shown in b for each condition (rows) and cell types defined by scrna-seq in the human fetal cortex39 (columns) (see also supplementary fig 21ab).e pearson’s correlations between the average gene expression in cell type clusters shown in b for each condition (rows) and cell types defined by scrna-seq in the human fetal cortex38 (columns) (see also supplementary fig 20e).f pearson’s correlations between the average gene expression in cell type clusters shown in b for each condition (rows) and cell types (excitatory neurons inhibitory neurons and astrocytes) defined by dronc-seq (scrna-seq with droplet technology) in an adult post-mortem human brain tissue40 (columns) (see also supplementary fig 20f).in addition transcriptome profiling showed enriched apoptotic and oxidative stress biological pro- cesses in cells grown in 2d cultures compared with those grown in 3d cultures and 3d cultures enabled electrophysiological mea- surements (supplementary fig 2 4).]
Patterns related to gene expression correlation between in cells and human brain developmental transcriptome were affected by the presence of HA in the 3D co-culture system.

Text 225
10.1126/science.aaq1723
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 2. neoblast ablation and enrichment experiments show stem and progenitor clusters. a. tsne plots showing the distribution of the cells of an x1 facs sorted sample (red) and its whole cell population control (x1 control, magenta), and a h2b(rnai) sample with its negative control (gfp(rnai), green). x1 cells are enriched in the center of the plot while h2b(rnai) cells are enriched in the periphery. b. pca analysis considering the expression level of neoblast marker genes and the log odds ratio of the amount of cells per cluster from h2b(rnai) and x1 experiments compared to wt and control samples separates neoblasts (grey), progenitor clusters (yellow) and differentiated cell clusters (blue). the location of these clusters is shown on the tsne plot on the right. c. gene expression correlation between bulk rna-seq data from facs sorted x1, x2, xins populations and whole worms and the pooled clusters as defined in b. neoblasts show a stronger correlation with x1, progenitors with x2, and differentiated cells with xins and whole worms.']. Reference sentences:[additionally we identified an epidermal related pharynx cell type (fig s5) and several parenchymal cell types previously undescribed molecularly (fig 2b fig s5).cells from these datasets showed a clear distribution pattern: x1 cells were located in the middle of the tsne plot (fig 2a red dots) whereas h2b(rnai) resistant cells were clearly en- riched in the periphery (fig 2a blue dots).this distribution was specific and not the result of batch effects as evident from the respective control samples (fig 2a x1 control and gfp(rnai) samples).the first two principal components resulting from this analysis separated clusters according to their gene expression profiles as neoblasts progenitors and differentiated cell clusters (fig 2b fig s2a).mapping onto the tsne revealed that progenitor cell clusters were located between differentiated cells and ne- oblast clusters (fig 2b).neoblasts clus- ters best correlated with x1 populations corresponding to high content dna g2/m neoblasts progenitor clusters cor- related with x2 populations a mixture of g1/s neoblasts and early progenitors and differentiated cell clusters corre- lated with xins samples a pool of all differentiated cells (fig 2c).]
Summary: Correlation patterns between cell populations based on gene expression profiles, with neoblasts correlating with x1, progenitors with x2, and differentiated cells with xins.

Text 226
10.1016/j.cell.2018.03.074
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 6. regulatory element dynamics links distal elements to genes (a) fragments per cell for a cebpd distal element ordered by myeloid pseudo-time, (top) cells are colored by their sorted identity and (bottom) values are smoothed (blue). error bars (gray) denotes 95% confidence intervals. (b) cis-regulatory and expression dynamics across four regulatory elements near the myeloid regulator cebpd. (c) accessibility (top) and expression (bottom) dynamics across myeloid pseudo-time, rows are sorted by their peak intensity in the myeloid trajectory. (d) regulatory profiles surrounding the cebpd gene, dynamic enhancers are highlighted in gray with significant (blue) and non-significant (gray) correlated peakgene pairs shown as loops. (e and f) mean pearson correlation coefficients binned by (e) genomic distance to the gene and (f) loop confidence. error bars represent 1 sd on the estimate of the mean. (g) p value of enriched peak-gene correlation or promoter capture hic at cis-eqtls overlapping dynamic enhancers. see also figure s6.']. Reference sentences:[for example within the regula- tory elements surrounding the myeloid regulator cebpd (numbered for simplicity see figure 6b) the distal element cebpd-1 was ‘‘fast-to-activate’’ and showed stepwise gains of activity while the distal element cebpd-2 was ‘‘slow-to-acti- vate’’ and showed a more discrete pulse of activity (figure 6b).we reasoned that correlation between dynamically activated patterns of distal regulatory elements with nearby expressed genes may be used to connect enhancers to target genes (figure 6c).indeed we found dynamic regulatory elements sur- rounding cebpd were highly correlated with cebpd expression (figure 6d).more generally we calculated the correlation of reg- ulatory elements to dynamic genes within 10 mb of annotated transcription start sites (‘‘peak-gene pairs’’) and found that proximal regulatory elements (<100 kb) were significantly more correlated to the expression of nearby genes than distant ele- ments (>100 kb) (figure 6e).further validating this approach we also found that the correlation of regulatory elements to target genes improved as a function of loop confidence within promoter capture hic (pchic) data (figure 6f) here defined by pchic loops from both cd34+ (mifsud et al. 2015) and mono- cyte (javierre et al. 2016) cells.loops all peak-gene pairs mean pearson 0 0.1 0.2 0.3 d cebpd expression <1kb 1-10kb 10-100kb 100kb-1mb 1-10mb mean pearson 0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 c g myeloid pseudo-time -2 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 0 max e 14005 variable regulatory elements 1983 variable genes correlate dynamics res to nearby genes (+/-10mb) scatac/rna correlation capture hic interaction enrichment at cis-eqtls (-log10 p-val) 0 1 2 3 4 f scale chr8: 1 mb hg19 48500000 49000000 49500000 50000000 kiaa0146 cebpd prkdc mcm4 ube2v2 efcab1 snai2 c8orf22 bc042029 k1-hsc k2-cmp k9-gmp k10-gmp k11-mono cd34+_hspcs chromosome 8 0 max expression per cell (l0g2) 0 1 2 hsc cmp gmp mono scatac-seq scrna-seq transition peaks early to repress late to repress early to activate late to activate hsc mono peak activity transition expression early to repress late to repress early to activate late to activate <0.5 0.5 1 pearson figure 6.association of tfs and genetic variants to regulatory element dynamics across myeloid differentiation related to figure 6 (a and b) example cis-regulatory dynamics across myeloid development for (a) hsc active peaks and (b) a reactivated peak near il7.]
Patterns of correlation between dynamic regulatory elements and nearby genes, with stronger correlations for proximal elements and higher loop confidence.

Text 227
10.1016/j.molcel.2018.03.030
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 3. senescence entry is characterized by hmgb2 nuclear loss (a) distribution of nuclear sizes in proliferating (gray) or senescent (green) huvecs, imr90s, and mscs. the total number of nuclei measured (n) is indicated. (b) typical images of senescent imr90 stained for b-galactosidase and dapi. (c) typical images of proliferating/senescent mscs, imr90s, and huvecs immunostained for hmgb1/b2 (left). bean plots (right) show changes in hmgb1/b2 levels in cells grouped according to increasing nuclear size. the total number of nuclei measured (n) is indicated. (d) typical images of proliferating/senescent huvecs immunostained for hmgb1/b2. fluorescence levels were used to produce scatterplots; median values minus one sd (dashed lines) and pearson’s correlation coefficients (r) are indicated. (e) as in (d), but for hmgb2 and p21.']. Reference sentences:[this way we could verify that hmgb1/b2 were depleted from essentially all large huvec imr90 or msc nuclei (figure 3c).]
Patterns related to correlation between nuclear size and HMGB1/2 levels in senescent cells across different cell types.

Text 228
10.1016/j.molcel.2018.03.030
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 2. scrna-seq highlights early hmgb2 suppression (a) unsupervised clustering of scrna-seq data from proliferating or senescent huvecs. each dot represents one cell, and number of cells per cluster is indicated. (b) mrna levels of 14 senescence-regulated genes in proliferating or senescent cells. (c) hmgb2 scrna-seq read counts were plotted against hmgb1 and cdkn1a read counts; median values minus one sd (dotted lines), pearson’s correlation coefficients (r), and the number of cells in each quadrant are indicated. (d) left: pseudo-time course clustering of scrna-seq data from proliferating or senescent huvecs. the main path (black line) also breaks into a secondary leg (yellow line). right: expression of six key genes in the clusters along the main path of proliferating (top) or senescent cells (bottom).']. Reference sentences:[unsupervised clustering showed proliferating and senescent cells segregating into four clusters (figure 2a).senescent cells lacking hmgb2 expression were also marked by high levels of the il6 and il8 sasp genes (figure 2b).importantly the gene expression profiles previously reported to hold key roles in senescence and the cell cycle like lmnb1 ezh2 pcna or ccna2 also differentially marked proliferating and senescent subpopulations but were less informative for clustering (figure 2b).we found that the gradual drop in hmgb1/b2 levels in proliferating huvecs sufficed for describing seven states that appear consecutively derived from one another (figure 2d).still sub- clusters 1 and 4 had hmgb2 suppressed but hmgb1 robustly detected (figure 2d).after confirming reproducibility be- tween hi-c maps from the same cell type and condition (fig- ure s3b) we merged replicates and could now afford =20-kbp resolution of spatial chromatin interactions in both proliferating and senescent cells (higher than that afforded for ‘‘deep’’ figure 2. scrna-seq highlights early hmgb2 suppression (a) unsupervised clustering of scrna-seq data from proliferating or senescent huvecs.]
Patterns of correlation between hmgb2, hmgb1, and cdkn1a gene expressions in proliferating and senescent cells.

Text 229
10.1016/j.molcel.2018.03.030
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 1. senescence entry signals suppression of specific pathways (a) left: b-galactosidase (b-gal) staining of proliferating and senescent huvec donors d1 and d2; percent of b-gal-positive cells is indicated. middle: mtt assays for d1 and d2 at different passages; cells were deemed senescent at passage 20 and 18, respectively (green lines). right: spearman’s correlation (r2) between actual and predicted huvec passage based on the methylation at six cpgs. (b) left: genes downregulated in senescence across cell types. right: pathways associated with shared downregulated genes. nodes (yellow) containing genes involved in dna conformation, dna packaging, or chromatin assembly are highlighted, and selected genes are listed (box). (c) ccnd2 locus rna-seq profiles in huvecs and imr90s. (d) hmgb1, hmgb2, ctcf, lamin b1, rad21, and p21 western blots at five different passages in huvecs and imr90s; b-tubulin provides a control.']. Reference sentences:[this renders them important for transcription figure 1.due to their ability to bend dna in vitro their reduced expression in senescent and ag- ing tissue in vivo and their unknown roles on chromatin we focused on hmgb1/b2 and verified their suppression at the pro- tein level in both imr90s and huvecs (figure 1d).]
Summary: Correlation between methylation at specific CpGs and cell passage, downregulation of genes and pathways related to DNA/chromatin, and suppression of HMGB1/B2 in senescent cells.

Text 230
10.1126/science.aar4362
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 3. single-cell and coarse-grained graphs encode progenitor-fate relationships. (a) tsne map of 6hpf epiblast and hypoblast states, colored by normalized transcript counts for select positional marker genes. overlapping color gradients demonstrate continuous expression domains defined by position. diagram relates positions of cells in the tsne map to theoretical positions in the embryo. (b) in silico fate predictions for 6hpf embryo cells. the top 100 cells with predicted 24hpf fate outcomes are indicated for shortest graph diffusion distances (red) or direct single-cell gene expression correlation distances (blue) between 6hpf cells and 24hpf cluster centroids. (c) construction and overview of the coarse-grained graph (see also fig s5). nodes indicate states (groups of transcriptionally similar cells), colored by timepoint. weighted edges connect similar states within or between timepoints. spanning tree edges connecting each node to the 4hpf root state through the top weighted edges are highlighted in dark grey. (d) coarse-grained graph nodes are colored by a “canalization” score, defined as the ratio of diffusion distances between each node and the 4hpf root node through state tree edges only vs. through all graph edges. highly canalized regions of the graph correspond to branches with the fewest off-tree edges.']. Reference sentences:[we found that the shield stage cells with the shortest mean graph distance to each particular 24hpf tissue were clustered and expressed spatial marker genes predicted from previous in vivo fate mapping studies (13–16) e.g. 24hpf neural tissues mapped to the 6hpf dorsal anterior epiblast (fig 3b and fig s4).con- versely direct comparison of 6hpf and 24hpf gene expression states failed to capture lineage relationships (blue points fig 3b and fig s4).a spanning tree was then traced through the most densely weighted edges to a 4hpf root state (fig 3c and fig s5a).off-tree interconnec- tions between states for example were evident for (1) the neural crest and pharyngeal arches (2) spinal cord and so- mitic mesoderm (3) the neural plate and others (fig 3c and fig s5a).to formalize the degree to which the developmental landscape can be approximated as a hierarchy with discrete non-looping branches we defined a ‘canalization score’ (fig 3d see legend for definition) which reflects the off-tree con- nectivity of each coarse-grained state node.]
Summary: Correlation patterns between 6hpf and 24hpf cells were captured by graph distances, not direct gene expression comparisons, revealing lineage relationships and canalized developmental branches.

Text 231
10.1126/science.aar4362
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 5. tracerseq reveals systematic relationships between cell lineage and cell state. (a) heatmap of tracerseq lineage coupling scores (see methods) between pairs of 24hpf states, clustered by correlation distance and average linkage. groups of states with similar lineage coupling signatures are annotated. (b) quantitative relationships between lineage coupling correlation distances and scaled state tree diffusion distances for (i) endothelial, (ii) optic cup, and (iii) myl+ muscle states (see also fig s10, a to f).']. Reference sentences:[hierarchical clustering of the pairwise correlation between coupling scores revealed structured groups of cell states (fig 5a) which comprised related tis- sues and/or inferred germ layer derivatives.the observed lineage isolation of these tissues is thus consistent with an early spatial partition- ing of this region further reflected in fig 5a by negative lin- eage correlations to most other states.a second group (fig 5a ‘ecto iii’) captures strong lineage couplings between an- terior neural tissues including the optic cup midbrain and telencephalon (16) and also to anterior epidermal derivatives such as the olfactory placode (22).the third example we note is a group coupling ectoderm and mesoderm (fig 5a ‘mesecto ii) in- cluding muscle (myl1+) myotome spinal cord posterior neu- ral crest and epidermal states.overlaying tracerseq lineage correlation scores on the cell state graph and comparing these scores to graph-derived state distances (fig 5b and fig s10) revealed that some nearby states on the state graph were indeed clonally correlated as expected by the simplistic model.these patterns were evident amongst state relationships for endothelial optic cup and muscle tis- sues (fig 5b and fig s10 a to f) and systematically when examining all states (fig s10g).tracerseq data however provides a clear signature of distinct clonal patterns between pharyngeal arch states: one pharyngeal arch state (ph.arch-tbx1) is a mem- ber of the “mesendo” lineage group with mesodermal clonal associations while the second pharyngeal arch state (ph.arch- cd248b) is clonally related to neural crest and posterior neural states (fig 5a and fig s11 b to f).]
Summary: Systematic relationships between cell lineage and state patterns revealed by correlation-based clustering of single-cell data.

Text 232
10.1126/science.aar4362
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 6. regulatory features of the developmental landscape identified by genetic perturbation (a) left: overview of the crispr experiment. three pairs of chordin and tyrosinase (control) targeted samples were prepared and processed by indrops ~14-16hpf. (b) histogram depicting numbers of differentially expressed genes (deg) identified in chordin vs. control (tyrosinase) cells for each state (blue bars), compared to deg numbers when comparing between all state pairs (red bars). deg were identified by wilcoxon ranksum test (adj. p-value < 0.01, absolute log2 fold change >1, average expression >25 transcripts per million). (c) histogram of pearson correlation similarities (after pcaprojection) between each chordin/tyrosinase cell and its nearest neighbor from 10hpf, 14hpf, and 18hpf wild-type datasets (see methods). (d) log2 ratios of cell states with significant differential abundance (fdr < 0.25) in the chordin vs. tyrosinase samples. purple and green regions correspond to wild-type cell states that are over- or under-represented in the chordin mutant, respectively. adjacent graph domains with opposing chordin sensitivity are highlighted by brackets. tb: tailbud region (see cdx4 expression in fig s3).']. Reference sentences:[indrops profiling was performed on chor- din-targeted and control embryos (tyrosinase-targeted see methods) in a narrow time series corresponding to ~14-16hpf (fig 6a).rather the number of genes differentially expressed within states was modest com- pared to the differences defining the wild-type states of the 14hpf embryo (fig 6b and fig s14a).additional features could be appreciated by projecting the crispr datasets directly onto the wild-type single-cell graph (fig 6 c and d).similar juxtaposed domains of opposing chordin sensitivity were evident in the axial mesoderm partitioning notochord from hatching gland and in the tailbud separating spinal cord from somitic mesoderm (fig 6d).]
Summary: Correlation patterns between chordin and tyrosinase cells at different time points, with differential abundance in specific cell states.

Text 233
10.1038/s41592-018-0009-z
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 1 | unbiased dissection of small interacting structures and scrna-seq resolve key cell types in the bm. a, experimental scheme. bm is mildly dissociated and interacting structures are subdissected into smaller units, which are single-cell dissected and placed in different tubes for further analysis. b, transcriptome similarities (1 – pearson’s correlation coefficient) between all 911 cell pairs in the final analysis (n =18 animals). raceid2 clustering is indicated along the axes by random colors. c, t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding (t-sne) map of transcriptome similarities. colors represent raceid2 clusters; gray edges connecting cells represent the actual physical interaction between cells. the putative cell types for the different clusters are indicated.']. Reference sentences:[we inferred the cell types present in the microdis- sected units by scrna-seq (fig 1a and supplementary video 1).we removed cells with a low total number of transcripts from the data- set and applied the raceid2 algorithm2025 to the remaining 911 cells which returned 45 potential cell types/states (fig 1bc).different experimental replicates did not cluster together which suggests that batch effects are negligible in this approach (supplementary fig 1a).to verify that our dissection method does not introduce cell type biases we checked the clusters represented within the different units of bm (≥ 4 cells) used to further subdis- sect doublets triplets and so on (supplementary fig 1bc).the number of interactions differed significantly from that in a background a 14 14 2 3 23 45 5 14 29 29 9 3 1 14 3 15 3 7 3 3 9 3 9 9 36 23 3 19 8 5 7 37 23 5 3 22 7 11 3 12 8 15 13 11 44 7 1 40 12 13 13 12 13 13 15 7 6 6 9 31 3 39 3 30 12 3 3 8 11 13 13 13 9 29 15 28 7 3 12 3 14 9 29 13 45 1 1 16 12 1 5 14 14 5 14 13 3 13 5 3 3 7 6 6 5 42 3 21 3 29 12 3 14 14 21 13 13 3 1 9 12 14 3 9 4 4 11 4 6 10 12 17 17 24 45 44 17 24 24 14 14 24 29 24 17 24 17 14 14 14 11 3 14 17 24 24 7 24 17 30 13 13 17 14 9 1 7 10 7 7 1 8 6 7 22 7 12 11 20 6 6 12 79 7 12 20 31 12 37 12 11 6 9 3 29 8 13 7 1 1 5 3 5 9 5 9 1 8 11 23 1 1 3 3 1 3 4 10 4 14 2 13 11 13 3 3 143 13 1313 13 13 42 20 13 7 1 25 4 18 22 4 13 3 13 3 1 13 13 3 66 3 6 3 2 13 7 6 6 15 6 13 9 5 3 23 13 3 6 3 42 38 3 13 11 16 9 3 12 12 13 20 27 4 13 16 1 1 25 8 2 12 12 13 16 1 12 22 5 23 16 5 23 10 4 9 42 2 3 3 1 13 13 3 13 4 11 5 4 13 3 4 3 3 11 11 12 3 6 15 3 3 14 1 4 9 3 22 3 7 12 13 1 4 1 22 25 4 12 12 7 9 13 12 12 26 9 6 7 18 9 9 1 16 1 9 26 9 11 9 12 7 12 24 9 35 6 1 3 9 6 3 3 13 3 3 12 11 3 3 6 25 6 13 23 3 6 10 5 9 9 3 9 7 5 9 11 9 3 29 3 11 12 9 7 9 9 5 3 12 15 3 1 3 3 7 12 11 15 9 3 3 13 9 9 3 3 3 1 1 6 1 11 9 4 9 5 5 5 3 3 3 3 9 3 25 6 10 9 12 3 3 3 10 6 6 3 10 9 1 3 5 11 1 1 1 1 1 12 3 1 3 1 1 25 3 8 3 25 6 5 6 9 3 19 3 9 1 44 1 5 25 6 9 6 43 12 4 7 5 6 12 12 9 1 43 6 6 9 16 1 5 1 1 7 1 9 7 3 1 9 1 1 3 9 8 8 9 3 13 2 3 9 8 3 9 6 13 2 15 9 3 3 3 9 8 10 3 3 3 3 6 14 8 9 7 6 9 6 6 9 3 3 12 32 2 6 14 6 9 3 45 5 12 6 9 13 13 12 5 13 12 6 12 3 13 3 12 3 3 11 6 6 1 13 3 13 12 27 12 7 3 20 5 6 6 9 3 7 3 11 6 9 3 8 13 9 1 1 3 3 1 10 1 1 6 4 7 4 3 1 6 3 9 11 3 6 6 2 3 6 6 3 4 3 29 3 6 66 13 13 2 9 6 6 13 3 3 4 8 9 3 6 5 12 4 6 5 13 6 1 6 7 8 13 6 6 9 9 11 1 6 12 6 6 3 12 1 6 6 6 6 15 5 12 6 13 12 6 6 6 6 15 5 12 6 6 6 6 6 12 1 6 6 8 10 1 1 3 13 10 6 6 13 3 1 3 3 3 12 3 10 12 11 8 6 8 8 34 15 5 10 3 8 12 15 6 11 3 13 13 12 11 12 20 5 12 9 13 12 6 11 6 13 11 3 1111 13 6 12 12 8 6 6 10 12 10 13 12 9 9 6 8 9 6 6 9 13 13 12 9 1 12 11 11 1 9 13 8 13 13 8 14 11 3 12 9 3 1 13 15 9 33 41 6 12 3 13 42 6 6 12 3 18 18 13 1 11 1 18 1 7 3 3 18 8 16 7 15 1818 3 9 18 3 12 8 25 8 13 4 8 10 7 6 27 8 8 18 8 8 13 8 8 6 8 8 8 8 8 3 12 27 13 8 10 3 5 8 8 8 22 10 11 8 6 3 3 8 13 8 18 16 8 8 b c neutrophils erythroblasts megakaryocytes plasma cells myeloblasts/promyelocytes myelocytes macrophages progenitors eosinophils mast cells/basophils t-sne dim1 t-sne dim2 3 13 6 12 4 7 9 8 2 1 3 13 6 12 4 7 9 8 2 1 bone marrow isolation mild dissociation microdissection to smaller interacting structures microdissection to single cells mrna isolation 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1 – pearson’s correlation coefficient fig 1 | unbiased dissection of small interacting structures and scrna-seq resolve key cell types in the bm.]
Patterns related to correlation between transcriptomes of different cell types in bone marrow were analyzed using single-cell transcriptomics.

Text 234
10.1038/s41591-018-0036-4
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 3 | crs severity correlates with leukemia burden. a, eight-week-old sgm3 mice were co-infused i.v. with 1×105 hspcs (n=3 donors, husgm3) and 5×106 cd19+cd44v6+ all-cm leukemic cells, and, after either 4 weeks (low leukemia burden) or 7 weeks (high leukemia burden), with nhusgm3 t cells transduced with either a cd44v6.28z car (44v6.28z, n=15 from 3 independent experiments) or a cd19.28z car (19.28z, n=15). leukemic nonhspc-humanized sgm3 mice were infused with either nhusgm3 cd44v6.28z or cd19.28z car t cells as control, and results were pooled (44v6/19.28z in sgm3, n=18). b,c, mean temperature change±s.d. in mice with low (b) and high (c) leukemia burden. dashed lines indicate the threshold for high fever (δt>2°c). a two-way anova with bonferroni correction was used for statistical analysis; p<0.001. d,e, kaplan–meyer survival plots for mice with low (d) and high (e) leukemia burden. results from a mantel–cox two-sided log-rank test are shown as exact p values for 44v6.28z in husgm3 versus 44v6/19.28z in sgm3 (red; hazard ratio, 10.3; 95% confidence interval (ci), 1.7–61.3) or for 19.28z in husgm3 versus 44v6/19.28z in sgm3 (blue; hazard ratio: 9.8; 95% ci, 1.9–49.9). f–k, husgm3 mice with high leukemia burden were infused with nhusgm3 t cells transduced with either a cd44v6.28z car (44v6.28z, n=10 from 2 independent experiments), a cd44v6.bbz car (44v6.bbz, n=10), a cd19.28z car (19.28z, n=10) or a cd19.bbz car (19.bbz, n=10). mean car t cell counts±s.d. (f,i) and mean temperature change±s.d. (g,j) are shown. dashed lines indicate the threshold for high fever (δt>2°c). a two-way anova with bonferroni correction was used for statistical analysis; p<0.05; p<0.01; p<0.001. kaplan–meyer survival plots for mice (h,k) are also shown. exact p values from a mantel–cox two-sided log-rank test are shown for 44v6.bbz versus 44v6.28z (red; hazard ratio, 0.3; 95% ci, 0.1–0.6).']. Reference sentences:[transduction and expansion rates with these cars were lower than that of t cells from human peripheral blood (pb) but were comparable to those of cb-derived t cells (supplementary fig 3ab).the cd4/cd8 ratio and memory differentiation phe- notypes were unaffected by car transduction (supplementary fig 3cd).for this aim sgm3 mice were coengrafted with human hspcs and all-cm leukemic cells and after verifying the establishment of different leukemia burdens were infused with nhusgm3 car t cells (fig 3a).crs following either cd19.28z or cd44v6.28z car t cell infusion was more severe in the case of high leukemia burden as revealed by more profound weight loss higher systemic levels of human il-6 (supplementary fig 9a–d) fever (fig 3bc) and markedly increased mortality (fig 3de) in recipient mice.cd44v6.bbz car t cells expanded with different kinetics (fig 3f) and unexpectedly caused significantly more severe crs than cd44v6.28z car t cells resulting in 100% mortality (fig 3gh).in line with results in humans713 cd19.bbz car t cells mediated similar antileukemic effects compared to cd19.28z car t cells without inducing overwhelm- ing mortality (fig 3i–k).]
Patterns related to correlation between leukemia burden and severity of CRS in mice infused with different types of CAR T cells.

Text 235
10.1016/j.cell.2018.05.019
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 2. nematostella larval cell types (a) 2d projection of nematostella larva 38 metacells and 4,146 cells. (b) expression of 367 variable genes (rows) across 4,146 cells. (c) larval-adult metacell maximum correlation versus fourth maximum observed gene enrichment. (d) expression (molecules/1,000 umis) of selected markers for larval-specific cell types. (e) (top) number of cells and larval stage composition of each metacell. (bottom) expression of selected markers for larval progenitors. (f) correlation between adult (rows) and larval (columns) metacells. (g) expression of selected tfs across adult and larva metacells. see also figure s2 and tables s1 and s3.']. Reference sentences:[each larval meta- cell was supported by hundreds of specific gene markers consistently expressed across single cells (figure 2b and table s3) and strong single-cell co-associations in bootstrap analysis (figure s2h).we then compared the larva-adult correlation to the overall larval transcriptional specificity (figure 2c).a second group of larval metacells shows low similarity to adult cell types but because these lack strong effector gene signatures (figure 2c) we hypothesized that these metacells correspond to undifferentiated states.a first group of metacells shows co-expression of two hes genes and soxb2 and is enriched for gastrula-stage cells (figure 2e).another group of progenitor/ precursor cells is characterized by the expression of soxb2a two myc paralogs and nanos2 and is more frequent in post-gas- trula stages (figure 2e).these affinities are demonstrated by the expression profiles of key tfs across larva and adult stages (figure 2g).two matched larva- adult gland/secretory metacells are defined by expression of the oasis1 tf and rx homeobox tf (with both gland/secretory metacells expressing the rfx4 tf) (figure 2g).in the analysis of the larval dataset (figure 2) we iteratively merged metacells with merge score > 10%.here we used k2d = 80; d2d = 8; tedge = 0:02; t2dcells = 1 = 30=250 for the adult dataset (figure 1) and k2d = 50; d2d = 8; tedge = 0:08; t2dcells = 1 = 30=150 for the larval dataset (figure 2).nematostella larval scrna-seq umi statistics and metacell analysis related to figure 2 (a) distribution of total rna molecules per cell.]
Patterns of correlation between larval and adult cell types, as well as expression of specific markers and transcription factors across different stages.

Text 236
10.1016/j.cell.2018.05.019
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 3. phylogenetic patterns of cell-type-specific gene repertoires (a) expression variability stratified by gene age. (b) gene age enrichment/depletion in gene sets specific to each broad cluster (q < 0.001; chi-squared test). (c) correlation between nematostella (columns) and c. elegans cell clusters. c. elegans data from cao et al., (2017). (d) (left) expression of orthologs driving specific cross-species similarities. (right) enriched gene ontology (go) terms among co-expressed orthologs. (e) correlation between organs/tissues of different vertebrate species and nematostella broad cell clusters. vertebrate data from brawand et al., (2011). (f) (top) expression orthologs driving neuron and brain/cerebellum similarity. (bottom) enriched go terms among neuron/brain co-expressed orthologs.']. Reference sentences:[cell 173 1520–1534 may 31 2018 1523 comparative analysis of cell-type-specific gene repertoires to facilitate comparative analysis of the nematostella cell type map we embedded each predicted nematostella protein within orthology groups including proteomes of species spanning a wide phylogenetic spectrum (figure 3a).we found that deeply conserved genes generally show low cell type specificity while new genes coding for cnidaria-specific proteins are strongly enriched for tissue-specific expression (figure 3a; p < 0.0001 wilcoxon rank-sum).complementarily genes that are expressed specifically in each of the eight broad metacell groups described above showed specific gene age distributions reﬂecting for example enrichment of cnidarian- specific genes in cnidocytes (figure 3b).1524 cell 173 1520–1534 may 31 2018 a b c d e f figure 3.(legend continued on next page) 1526 cell 173 1520–1534 may 31 2018 transcriptional states with orthologous expression profiles ac- quired from the model nematode caenorhabditis elegans (cao et al. 2017) (figure 3c).first nema- tostella retractor muscle and gastrodermal cells are associated with c. elegans intestinal and body wall muscles a similariy driven by 138 orthologs enriched in muscle- and actin-based contractility functions—for example tropomyosin and calponin (figure 3d).following our observation of broad cross-lineage similarities in neuronal molecular profiles (figure 3) we asked whether the specific neuronal types we characterize in nematostella have any cognates in mice and/or c. elegans (cao et al. 2017; tasic et al. 2016).these results suggest that despite broad similarities between neurons across species (figure 3) the diversification of specific neuronal cell types is largely lineage specific—at least at the evolutionary distances considered here—and that different neuronal-type radiations assembled specific gene modules.]
Correlation between cell clusters from different species based on ortholog expression profiles and enriched gene ontology terms.

Text 237
10.1016/j.cell.2018.05.019
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure s5. nematostella general tf map with names and gene ids, related to figure 6 (a) tf-tf pearson correlation based on expression profile across cell clusters. (b) tf expression profile across cell clusters. tf names and ids are indicated and color-coded according to tf structural class.']. Reference sentences:[]
Summary: Correlation patterns of transcription factors across cell clusters based on expression profiles.

Text 238
10.1016/j.cell.2018.05.019
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure s6. nematostella motif enrichment supplementary analyses, related to figure 7 (a) motif-motif pearson correlation based on occurrence of each motif in nematostella promoters. a single representative pwm from each metacell (indicated in black in the ﬂanking colorbars) was used for downstream analyses. pwms were obtained from cisbp database (weirauch et al., 2014). (b) cumulative distribution of p values for the hypergeometric motif enrichment tests in promoters and enhancers in the original dataset (black) and shufﬂing metacell-gene associations (red). (c) motif-motif pearson correlation between shared promoter (columns) and enhancer (rows) enriched motifs (presented in the same order as promoter motifs in figure 4), showing that there is no correspondence of the same motif enrichments at enhancers and promoters. (d) ets-erg tf motif promoter fold-change enrichment in 100bp windows around the tss for a particular gene set with a significant motif enrichment (green line, fdr < 0.01) and the tss of background genes (black line) (top-left). motif logo derived from promoters with significant ets-erg motif (top-right). promoter motif enrichment (log2 fold change) across metacells (middle). ets-erg expression (molecules per 10,000 umis) profile across metacells (bottom). (e–f) same as (d) for foxa (e) and pou4 (f) tfs, respectively. (g) same as (d) for gata tfs in enhancers. asterisks indicate significant enrichments (fdr < 0.001). ids represent cisbp entries (weirauch et al., 2014).']. Reference sentences:[]
Summary: Correlation patterns between motifs in promoters and enhancers, with motif enrichment tests and TF motif fold-change enrichments across different cells.

Text 239
10.1016/j.cell.2018.05.019
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 6. transcription factor regulatory programs in nematostella (a) structural class and evolutionary age of 409 detected nematostella tfs. (b) proportion of tf rna molecules in each metacell (p < 0.0001, chi-squared test). (c) tf-tf correlation. (d) tf expression across metacells. (e) expression and ish of nematostella paxa tf. (f) expression and ish of nematostella zfc2h2 fez tf. (g) expression and ish of nematostella foxa tf. all expression values are molecules/10,000 umis. scale bars: 500 mm (200 mm, fez inset). see also figure s5.']. Reference sentences:[classification of these 409 nematostella tfs into 38 structural families (figure 6a) showed that the homeobox tf class constitutes 26% of the total tfs expressed in nematostella.51% (207) of the expressed tfs showed evidence for meta- cell-specific expression (compared to 35% overall for all genes; p < 0.0001 chi-squared) and amount to 1.7% (median) of the total transcripts (figure 6b).analysis of the tf expression profiles across metacells (figure 6d) highlighted several tfs that are widely expressed within one of the eight broad clusters identified above as well as many tfs with more restricted profiles.similarly zfc2h2 fez tf showed expression in a specific population of neurons (figure 6f).cell 173 1520–1534 may 31 2018 1529 digestive filament and gland/secretory cell clusters (figure 6g).we detected binding motifs enrichments (false discovery rate [fdr] < 0.02) in all of these gene sets (figure 6a) and identified cases in which the expression profile of a tf was corre- lated with the enrichment profile of its putative binding motif as exemplified by the ascc neuronal profile foxa-gland cells/ digestive filaments profile erg gastrodermal profile and pou4 neuronal/cnidocyte profile (figures 7b and s6d–s6f).myb t-box zfc2h2 other tfs neurons figure 6.nematostella general tf map with names and gene ids related to figure 6 (a) tf-tf pearson correlation based on expression profile across cell clusters.]
TF expression patterns and correlations across metacells in nematostella single cells.

Text 240
10.1038/s41422-018-0053-3
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 5 comparison of embryonic neuron sub-clusters to adult ones. a pca plot of both excitatory neuron sub-clusters and adult ones. b heatmap of expression of the top genes in the pcs corresponding to panel (a) and the enriched terms for each pc gene set. red bar indicates the genes positively correlated in each pc and the green bar indicates the negatively correlated genes in each pc. c pca plot of both inhibitory neuron sub-clusters and adult ones. d heatmap of expression of the top genes in the pcs corresponding to panel (c) and the enriched terms for each pc gene set. e monocle analysis of inhibitory neurons together with those identified in developing pre-frontal cortex. sst+ cells show up randomly on the pseudotime']. Reference sentences:[to obtain further insight into the differences between embryonic and adult cortex neurons we compared our single- cell data with those of the adult neurons by principal component analysis (pca) after removing batch effect (fig 5a).both pc1 and pc2 reﬂected the differences between immature and mature embryonic neurons and the enriched terms were also associated with projection development and synaptic plasticity (fig 5b).pc1 genes clearly separated the embryonic inhibitory neurons from the adult neurons (fig 5c).the pc3 and pc4 genes mainly reﬂected the differences among the subgroups of adult inhibitory neurons whereas the embryonic inhibitory neurons exhibited no significant differences on these two axes (fig 5d).inhibitory neurons at 22–23 w in this study mainly located from early to the middle developing stages on the pseudotime path (fig 5e).]
Patterns of gene expression correlations between embryonic and adult neuron sub-clusters were analyzed using PCA and Monocle, revealing differences in developmental stages.

Text 241
10.1371/journal.pbio.2006387
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 6. latent factor analysis reveals a common mode of continuous variation that is consistent across cell types and correlates with axon target location. (a) latent factor analysis assigns a single number to each cell via a search for the factor values that best predict expression of multiple genes. mean factor values within each cluster differ systematically in a way that correlates with the identified cell class’s axon target location. each point represents a cell, with the x-coordinate showing latent factor value and y-coordinate showing cluster, sorted by mean latent factor value. (b) continuous gradient of latent factor values across continent 8 (top; symbol size denotes latent factor value). largest values are found in western slc17a8-expressing neurons identified with soma-targeting cck basket cells; smallest values are found in eastern calb1-expressing neurons identified with dendrite-targeting cck cells. (c) correlation of latent factor values with expression of six example genes.']. Reference sentences:[as expected latent factor analysis produced a complementary view to cluster analysis (fig 6a).the mean latent factor value of each cluster correlated with the axon target location of the corresponding cell type (fig 6a).for example a gradient of latent factor values was seen within continent 8 (identified with cck-positive neurons at the sr/slm border) with larger values in the west smoothly transitioning to smaller values in the east (fig 6b).we investigated the relationships of genes to the latent factor by focusing initially on the pvalb- and cck-expressing cells of continents 2 and 8 (fig 6c).as expected from the scatterplots (fig 6c) the correlation coefficients for atp1b1 gad1 and 6330403k07rikwere similar between continents 2 and 8 (fig 6d).in general the correlation coefficients of genes with the latent factor were preserved between continents 2 and 8 (fig 6d; spearman rank correlation ρ = 0.58 p < 10−100).a similar relationship was found across all continents (fig 6d inset; p < 10−100 in each case) although cells of continents 9 and 10 showed less similarity than continents 1–8.consistent with this hypothesis genes associated with fast-spiking phenotype (kcnc1 kcna1 scn1a scn8a syt2) were amongst the genes most positively correlated with the latent factor in both pvalb and cck basket cells (fig 6d).however scatterplots of expression (fig 6c) show unnormalized values.fig 6a).fig 6d).]
Patterns of correlation between latent factor values and gene expression across different cell types, reflecting axon target location.

Text 242
10.1016/j.cell.2018.05.021
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 2. comparison of drop-seq cluster transcriptomes and facs-sorted cell-type transcriptomes shows striking similarities between certain clusters and cell types and is used to annotate the drop-seq clusters (a) the expression levels of 401 selected drop-seq cluster markers (rows) are shown for ‘‘simulated single cells’’ (columns) representative of facs-sorted cell types (green, cell-type name indicated on top) and for single cells of the respective drop-seq clusters (red, cluster number indicated on top) (see table s1). each facs-sorted cell type clearly corresponds to one drop-seq cluster. (b) histograms showing the pearson correlation of the transcriptome of each facs-sorted cell type with the transcriptome of the more correlated clusters. most of the cell types map to one cluster. error bars represent sem of the triplicates’ pearson correlation with the more related clusters. (c) r74g01-gal4>uas-myrgfp is expressed in two cell types: tm1, whose projections in the lobula are indicated by the arrowhead, and t1, whose projections in the lamina are marked by the arrow. ncad is used to visualize the neuropils. scale bar, 20 mm. (d) the heatmap shows the expression levels of the 401 selected markers (rows) in ‘‘simulated single cells’’ (columns) that represent r74g01-gal4 and in single cells of the respective drop-seq clusters, 12 and 23. since r74g01-gal4 is expressed in two different cell types, t1 and tm1, its transcriptome matches two drop-seq clusters. (e) histogram showing the pearson correlation of the t1 and tm1 mixed population transcriptome with the more correlated drop-seq clusters. it maps to two clusters, 12 and 23. see also figure s2.']. Reference sentences:[pearson correlations between the simu- lated single-cell transcriptomes of facs-sorted cells and the transcriptomes of drop-seq clusters supported the visual matching (figure 2b and s2e).attesting to the quality of the clustering we observed that very similar cell types clustered into the same cluster i.e. c2/c3 (cluster 8) t2/t3 (cluster 6) t4/t5 (cluster 2) and lawf1/lawf2 (cluster 25) (figure 2a s2d and 3b).for this pur- pose we used a gal4 line that marks two different cell types: t1 and tm1 (figure 2c).we looked for clusters expressing these combina- tions of genes and identified cluster 17 as mi1 (which was also identified by the drop-seq-facs comparison) (figure 2a) clus- ter 52 as pm3 and cluster 13 as pm1/pm2 (figure 3b).to study which transcription factors regulate downstream effectors and cell-type identity we treated the data as cluster transcriptomes figure 2.to rigorously test the model and verify that we can infer a causal relationship between the identified (b) annotation of neuronal clusters using three different techniques: (1) based on their correspondence to the facs-sorted cell-type transcriptomes (see also figure 2) (2) based on known markers (mi1 expresses bsh and pm1 pm2 and pm3 express lim3 pm1 and pm2 express svp pm1 expresses tsh and pm3 expresses vsx1) and (3) based on newly identified markers (kn is expressed in cluster 15 and corresponds to tmy14 and cg42458 is mainly expressed in cluster 12 and corresponds to tmy8).generation of cell-type-specific rna sequencing data using facs and comparison to drop-seq clusters related to figure 2 (a) we used bulk rna sequencing after facs sorting to generate the transcriptome of 17 cell types.]
The correlation between facs-sorted cell types and drop-seq clusters is shown, with most cell types mapping to one cluster.

Text 243
10.1016/j.cell.2018.05.021
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure s2. generation of cell-type-specific rna sequencing data using facs and comparison to drop-seq clusters, related to figure 2 (a) we used bulk rna sequencing after facs sorting to generate the transcriptome of 17 cell types. 4 were locally arborizing, while 13 were projection neurons. 12 were unicolumnar and 5 multicolumnar. 11 were cholinergic, 4 were glutamatergic, and 2 were gabaergic. (b) pca plot of the biological triplicates of each cell type. (c) the expression of 401 selected drop-seq cluster markers (rows) is shown in all simulated single cells (columns). cell types are separated by white lines. (d) the expression of 401 selected drop-seq cluster markers (rows) is shown in ‘‘simulated single cells’’ (columns) representative of facs-sorted cell types (green – cell type name indicated on top) and in single cells of the respective drop-seq clusters (red – cluster number indicated on top). each facs-sorted cell type can be assigned to one drop-seq cluster. (e) histograms showing the pearson correlation of each facs-sorted cell type with the more correlated clusters. most of the cell types map to one cluster. tm5c and dm12 may be assigned to more than one cluster. error bars represent standard error of the mean of the triplicates’ pearson correlation with the more related clusters.']. Reference sentences:[]
Summary: Correlation patterns between facs-sorted cell types and drop-seq clusters, with most cell types mapping to one cluster.

Text 244
10.1016/j.cell.2018.05.021
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 5. a random forest model identifies transcription factors that regulate terminal genes involved in neurotransmitter expression (a–f) we trained a random forest model using 39 clusters as a training set and 13 clusters as a test set. (a) the generated model can faithfully predict the expression of all genes in the test clusters given the transcription factor expression. the accuracy of the prediction was 98% for the neuronal clusters and 77% for the glial clusters (mainly because of the fewer clusters that led to incomplete training of the model). (b) the pearson correlation between the predicted and the actual transcriptome ranged from 84.9% to 97.5% in the neuronal clusters and was 70.2% in the glial cluster. (c) using the random forest model, we identified the transcription factors mainly responsible for the generation of each of the four neurotransmitter identities: cholinergic (apterous), glutamatergic (traffic-jam), gabaergic (lim3), and monoaminergic (cg33695). (d) the expression of chat was predicted to rely on the expression of ap in a subset of the clusters. knockdown of ap in the adult optic lobe led to the downregulation of chat in specific medulla layers, m6 and m10, as well as in the lobula. (e) effect of tj knockdown in the expression of vglut. the expression of vglut in synaptic boutons in medulla layers m1 and m6 is reduced upon downregulation of tj. (f) the expression of chat, gad1, and vglut is predicted to be regulated by ap, lim3, and tj, respectively. qpcr for the mrna of chat, gad1, and vglut shows that the genes encoding these transcription factors are significantly downregulated upon activation of rnai against their respective predicted regulators. data are represented as mean ± sem. scale bar, 20 mm. see also figure s5.']. Reference sentences:[chat staining was severely reduced in several medulla and lobula layers suggesting that ap is neces- sary for the expression of chat in many although not all cell types (figure 5d).synaptic boutons in medulla layers m1 and m6 that clearly expressed vglut in wild-type optic lobes no longer expressed vglut upon tj knockdown (figure 5e).gad1 was significantly reduced upon activation of the lim3 rnai in adult cells (figure 5f).we saw downre- gulation of the terminal genes upon knocking down their predicted regulators (figure 5f) which verified our previous observations.neuronal and glial training and test sets that were used to test the random forest model for the prediction of gene expression based on transcription factors related to figure 5 (a) 33 neuronal clusters (green) and 6 glial clusters (red) were used for training the ‘random forest’ model.]
The correlation between transcription factors and terminal gene expression in different cell types was analyzed, with high accuracy and identified regulators.

Text 245
10.1016/j.cell.2018.05.021
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 6. cell-type-specific transcription factors regulate terminal genes in different cells (a) we used the random forest model to identify the top transcription factors that better correlated with the expression of effector genes. chat expression correlated best with the expression of three transcription factors, ap, chn, and cg16779. (a’) similarly, the expression pattern of vglut may be generated by the combination of four different transcription factors (traffic-jam, fd59a, cg32105, and cg4328). (a’’) the candidates for generating gad1 expression pattern are lim3 and ey. (a’’’) one transcription factor, cg33695, was needed to explain the expression of vmat. (b) two extant cell types that express an effector gene (indicated by the bold line) may either share a common ancestor that was expressing this gene or have independently evolved the capacity to express it. in the latter case, the expression of this gene may rely on the same or different transcription factors. (b’) as a consequence of the evolutionary history of the effector gene, its expression in different cell types of the optic lobe may rely on either the same transcription factor (single activator) or different transcription factors may regulate its expression in different cell types (neuronal-type-specific activator). (c) out of the 9,738 genes that are expressed in the adult drosophila optic lobe (excluding transcription factors), 3,085 genes support a single activator model, whereas 6,653 genes are better explained by a cell-type-specific activator model. (c’) the genes that supported the single-activator model are expressed in few clusters (2.2 clusters on average), whereas the 6,653 genes explained by the celltype-specific activator model covered a larger range of clusters (22.2 on average). see also table s2.']. Reference sentences:[we only found one gene for vmat (cg33695) (figure 6a–6a’’’).two cell types that share common traits (e.g. produce the same neurotransmitter) may either have inherited this trait from a common ancestor or may have acquired it independently (figure 6b).in the latter case the trait could be regulated by different (convergence) or by the same transcription factors (deep homology) (tschopp and tabin 2017) (figure 6b’).we repeated this for every gene expressed in the optic lobe (9738 genes excluding transcription factors) and asked which model (figure 6b’) was better supported by each of these genes.3085 genes were better explained by a single activator model while 6653 genes were better explained by a model where different transcription factors are required to generate its expres- sion pattern (figure 6c).indeed these genes were expressed on average in 2.2 clusters while the 6653 genes were expressed in a larger number of clusters (22.2) (figure 6c’).interest- ingly lim3 has been associated with either glutamatergic or gabaergic neurons in different systems (bretzner and brown- stone 2013; joshi et al. 2009; ladewig et al. 2014; serrano- saiz et al. 2013; thor et al. 1999) indicating plasticity which agrees with our model of extensive phenotypic convergence (figure 6b).]
Transcription factors correlate with gene expression patterns in different cell types, supporting either a single activator or cell-type-specific activator model.

Text 246
10.1016/j.cell.2018.05.057
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure s5. dati and prospero regulatory networks and glycolysis levels among the clusters, related to figure 4 (a) predicted network for dati and prospero target genes. (b) expression of predicted target genes positively and negatively correlated with dati. (c) dati, jim, hb and rn share the same binding motif and are positively correlated with each other, suggesting some form of redundancy in the network. (d) glycolysis activity for each seurat cluster. clusters are colored by main cell group.']. Reference sentences:[]
Summary: Correlation patterns between gene expressions and regulatory networks, with shared binding motifs and glycolysis activity across cell clusters.

Text 247
10.1016/j.cell.2018.05.057
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 5. aged cells have reduced transcriptional output but retain identity (a) the number of umis and genes show an exponential decline over aging for both dgrp-551 and w1118. (b) t-sne of young and old cells, showing the stability of cell types manifested by the presence of each cluster in both t-snes. cluster 23 (gap in the middle of old t-sne) is likely an artifact because it occurs only in one replicate of young ﬂies (figures s3b–s3f). pie plots show a change in composition, with a slight increase in relative amount of glia (5% to 11%). (c) correlation of each gene with age. most genes decline with age, especially those involved in oxidative phosphorylation, while ribosomal genes involved in translation are more protected. (d) change in oxphos activity, as measured by aucell, for the three neuronal groups defined above. see also figures s4 and s7.']. Reference sentences:[the decline of total rna does not appear to affect cellular identity as illustrated by the consistent cell-type clustering in both young and old brains (figure 5b) and the fact that aging is rarely (except in glial cells) the major correlate to destiny-derived diffusion components (angerer et al. 2016) (figure s7c).however while all cell types are retained in old brains there is a slight change in cell composition of old brains as shown by a relative increase of glia reminiscent of human brain aging (soreq et al. 2017) (figure 5b).next to assess whether all genes were equally affected by this decline we calculated the correlation of each gene with age and found a subset of genes that show only a marginal decline in gene expression levels (figure 5c).therefore we checked whether the decline in oxidative phosphorylation was caused by the aging of one of these groups; however all groups show a similar decline of oxidative phosphorylation sug- gesting a general effect on aging (figure 5d).since these experiments were performed on non-fixed brains this allowed us to age (days) total mrna (#umis) 5000 4000 3000 2000 1000 0 a c d b 0 10 20 30 40 50 2000 1600 1200 800 400 0 numi dgrp-551 r2 = 0.91 numi w1118 r2 = 0.84 ngene dgrp-551 r2 = 0.89 ngene w1118 r2 = 0.68 0 1 3 & 6 days 9 15 30 & 50 days neurons central brain a central brain b optic lobe 0.6 0.0 oxphos auc values glia 0.1 0 -0.3 0 8 10 28 decline with age mean expression ribosomal protein gene oxidative phosphorylation gene labelled: age predictors sta tm4sf mt:coiii lncrna:cr34335 mt:lrrna hsromega oxidative phosphorylation [go:0006119] fdr: 4.8x10-11 translation [go:0006412] fdr: 3.1x10-11 tsne 1 tsne 2 age (days) 0 1 3 6 9 15 30 50 number of genes figure 5.]
Correlation of gene expression with aging, decline in oxidative phosphorylation, and stable cell type clustering across different ages.

Text 248
10.1016/j.cell.2018.05.057
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 6. age affects mitochondrial turnover and cell size and can be accurately predicted by the transcriptome (a) mitotimer for the dfbs (r23e10-gal4), showing mitochondrial renewal over aging. scale bars, 100 mm, 10 mm. (b) bar plot showing a significant (t test, p < 0.0001) decline in synthesis of mitochondrial proteins. error bars show sem. (c) boxplot showing a significant (t test, p < 0.0001) reduction in cell size for all measured neuronal types. (d) random forest regressor prediction score for each seurat cluster (age predict). the score is independent of number of umis, oxphos activity, or correlation of diffusion components with age and seems to only correlate with the r2 value of the exponential fit. (e) predictions of the random forest model trained on all cells. six features were found to be most inﬂuential. (f) expression of the six most important features over time, displaying different patterns. see also figure s7.']. Reference sentences:[cell size decreases during aging (figure 6c) in agree- ment with the decline in mrna content.applying and testing this model to all cells yielded very accurate age predictions (figure 6e).the most informative genes include mt:lrrna hsromega tm4sf and sta which all show different aging dynamics (figure 6f).]
Patterns related to aging dynamics, including cell size reduction and gene expression changes, accurately predicted by transcriptome.

Text 249
10.1681/ASN.2018020125
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 4. analysis of endothelial cell (ec) subsets. (a) tsne plot of endothelial subclusters from the kidney biopsy. (b) heat map showing selected marker genes for the three ec subclusters. (c) violin plots showing conserved expression of endothelial markers across all three subclusters. the genes sema3g, igfbp3, serpine2, and aqp1 indicate activation of an angiogenic program. a separate ec subcluster expresses igs as well as markers of endoplasmic reticulum stress (xbp1) and cold shock (rbm3). (d) pearson correlation of all three ec subsets shows best correlation between the resting ec cluster and healthy brain or pancreas ecs. (e) markers of antibody-mediated rejection are detected in the angiogenic cluster.']. Reference sentences:[reclustering of the ecs revealed three separate cell states in rejection (figure 4 a and b).differential gene expression analysis suggested that the predominant ec cluster was in the resting state because it expressed ec markers (pecam1 vwf and eng) but no transcripts previously associated with abmr or angiogenesis (figure 4c).we compared average gene expression of the three clusters with healthy human brain and pancreas ecs and the resting cluster correlated best (figure 4d).a smaller subcluster expressed the angiogenic program33 with several of these genes previously described in association with abmr (figure 4 c and e)3435 a third ec cluster expressed markers of endoplasmic stress (xbp1) and the cold shock gene rbm3 suggesting cell stress and activation.this cluster was also actively transcribing ig such as has been observed in vitro (figure 4c).36 the src family kinases have been shown to be activated on ingestion of igg.studies have shown that this process occurs in ec via fc receptor–mediated phagocytosis.38 in line with figure 4.]
Summary: Correlation analysis of endothelial cell subsets in rejection shows best correlation with resting state and markers of antibody-mediated rejection in an angiogenic cluster.

Text 250
10.1681/ASN.2018020125
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 2. annotation of leukocyte subsets. (a) heat map indicating pearson correlations of the averaged transcriptional profiles between human pbmcs and leukocyte clusters from the kidney biopsy. (b) ligand-receptor pair expression according to cell type. ligands are indicated in the left panel, and receptors are indicated in the right panel. straight lines indicate ligand-receptor pairs. (c) the biopsy monocyte 1 cluster is most similar to cd16+ peripheral blood monocytes on the basis of average expression; however, these cells form different clusters on the basis of tsne, indicating that they are different cell types. (d) the monocyte 1 cluster is differentiating toward an acquired dendritic cell phenotype on the basis of expression of marker genes. (e) violin plot showing that fcgr3a (cd16) distinguishes monocyte 1 from monocyte 2, whereas fcn1 is expressed in monocyte 2 but not monocyte 1. msr1 is expressed in both clusters. (f) immunohistochemistry for fcgr3a or fcn1 on normal, mixed rejected, or pure antibody-mediated rejection (abmr) transplant kidney biopsies. distinct monocyte 1 and 2 cell types can be seen. upper and lower panels are serial sections. scale bar, 50 mm. (g) immunoﬂuorescence analysis of mixed rejection. fcn1+ cells (arrowheads) and fcgr3a+ cells (arrows) are separate cell types. cd, collecting duct; dapi, 49,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole; ec, endothelial cell; loh (al), loop of henle, ascending limb; loh (dl), loop of henle, distal limb; mono, monocyte; pt, proximal tubule. scale bar, 10 mm.']. Reference sentences:[a similar number of unique clusters were identified using an independent clustering approach12 (supplemental figure 2).comparative analysis reveals monocyte cell-state transition and cell-cell interactions between many cell types monocyte infiltrationisquantitativelyassociated withkidneydys- function during allograft rejection.1415 by mapping our dataset to a published single-cell pbmc dataset16 we identified two dis- tinct monocyte clusters (figure 2a).monocyte 1 strongly ex- pressed fcgr3a (cd16) and was most similar to cd16-positive proinﬂammatory nonclassic monocytes.17 of note cd16++ cells are strongly associated with allograft rejection.1819 monocyte 2 seems to be a classic or intermediate monocyte population (figure 2a supplemental table 4).interestingly abca1 which mediates sterol efﬂux in activated dendritic cells (dcs)2021 was uniquely detected in monocyte 1 (figure 2d) likely indicating a phenotypic transition toward a dc fate by monocytes in allograft rejection.in support of this inter- pretation direct comparison of monocyte 1 with the mon- o_cd16+_c1qa cluster from the pbmc dataset revealed a clear separation of monocyte 1 and the pbmc monocytes although they were highly correlated on the basis of averaged expression (figure 2c).although both cells clusters expressed typical monocyte markers (figure 2d) monocyte 1 from the biopsy dataset highly expressed two receptors (sdc3 and abca1) (figure 2d) and a panel of dc maturation markers including apoe22 pde3a igkc23 lgmn and icd8324 sug- gesting differentiation into dc in situ (figure 2d).we identified unique marker genes for each monocyte clus- ter (figure 2e) and performed immunohistochemistry on in- dependent transplant biopsies with histologic diagnoses of no disease mixed rejection or abmr.by contrast there was strong staining for both monocyte subsets in mixed rejection with lesser infiltration in pure abmr (figure 2f supplemental figure 5).costaining by immunoﬂuorescence analysis confirmed that the monocyte subtypes are separate populations (figure 2g).ligand-receptoranalysisrevealedexpressionof14receptors (excluding collagens) for which we could detect expression of their cognate ligands (figure 2b).further evidence for parenchymal cell regulation of the inﬂammatory response comes from the observation that collecting duct epithelia ex- press kitlg also known as stem cell factor which binds the transmembrane receptor encoded by kit and is expressed on mast cells in the biopsy (figure 2b).25 stem cell factor pro- motes mast cell migration adhesion proliferation and sur- vival.]
Patterns related to correlation between monocyte subsets and their differentiation towards dendritic cell fate in kidney biopsy.

Text 251
10.1038/s41590-018-0160-9
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 1 | a burst of transcriptional regulatory machinery characterizes early t cell activation. a, flow cytometry of ot-i cd8+ t cells stimulated for 0, 1, 3 or 6h (above plots) with n4. numbers in quadrants indicate percent cells in each. data are representative of at least two independent experiments. b, principal-component analysis of scrna-seq data from cells sorted as in a (time, key), showing principal components 1 and 2 (pc1 and pc2). c, diffusion pseudotime analysis of sequenced cells as in b (time, key), plotted by diffusion components 1 and 2 (dc1 and dc2); curved line in plot delineates the pseudotime trajectory. d, analysis in c with symbol colors indicating clusters (key) in diffusion pseudotime. e, expression (key below) of the top 20 genes (one per row; right margin) transcriptionally upregulated in cells in the early-activation cluster, relative to their expression in cells in the resting and late-activation clusters; genes clustered by pearson correlation (left margin); colors along left margin identify genes encoding transcriptional regulatory molecules (tr) or not (bottom right key). f, expression of selected transcription factor–encoding genes in e, presented as box plots (middle line, median; box outlines, interquartile range; ‘whiskers’ extend up to 1.5×the interquartile range). each symbol (b–d,f) represents an individual cell. cells in b–f: n=44 (0h), 51 (1h), 64 (3h) or 46 (6h).']. Reference sentences:[we first profiled a time course of strong stimulation by sequencing the transcriptomes of individual ot-i cd8+ t cells after 0 1 3 or 6 h of activation with 1 µ m of the high-potency ot-i tcr cognate pep- tide n4 in the presence of the cytokine il-2 (supplementary fig 1a).protein profiles revealed a rapid drop in the expression of cd62l followed by sequential increases in the expression of cd69 cd25 and cd44 (fig 1a).the examination of surface protein measurements and application of principal-compo- nent analysis to the mrna data confirmed that despite the uniform activation stimulus these cells were heterogeneous during the first 6 h of activation (fig 1ab).fitting a diffusion pseudotime trajectory to the single-cell tran- scriptomic data we created a fine-grained map of activation (fig 1c and supplementary fig 1b).the distribution along pseudotime of all cells from the vari- ous time points revealed three clusters of cells: resting cells early activated cells and late activated cells (fig 1d and supplementary fig 1cd).filtering for dif- ferentially expressed genes uniquely upregulated in early activation revealed enrichment for the number of genes encoding transcrip- tional regulators (enrichment p value 1.8 × 10−9 (hypergeomet- ric test); fig 1e and supplementary fig 1e).in particular genes encoding members of the early response nr4a family of orphan nuclear receptors including nur77 (nr4a1) whose expression has been found to reflect tcr signaling activity2734–36 had their highest expression 1 h after activation (fig 1f).bc residual expression (after expression of cd69 protein was accounted for) of selected chemokine-encoding genes (b) or genes encoding molecules associated with the presentation of antigen by mhc class i (c) in scrna-seq data in cells stimulated with n4 t4 or g4 (horizontal axis) presented as box plots (as in fig 1f).we observed no inhibitory effect of excess n4 peptide on early- activation protein phenotypes (supplementary fig 1a).]
Patterns related to correlation in gene expression changes during early T cell activation.

Text 252
10.1136/annrheumdis-2017-212863
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 2 identification of chondrocyte populations and gene signatures during human oa progression. (a) visualisation of t-sne coloured according to cell types for human oa cartilage single-cell transcriptomes. (b) monocle pseudospace trajectory revealing the oa chondrocyte lineage progression coloured according to cell types. (c) dot plots showing the stage distribution in each cluster. heatmap showing the pairwise correlations. (d) heatmap revealing the scaled expression of differentially expressed genes for each cluster defined in (a). specific representative genes in each chondrocyte subsets are highlighted along the right margin. the colour scheme is based on z-scores. (e) dot plots showing the expression of indicated markers for each cell cluster on the t-sne map. (f) representative immunohistochemistry assay of indicated genes in cartilage tissues. scale bar, left, 500µm; right, 50µm. the scores of different areas (up, middle, down) in cartilage tissues based on the immunohistochemistry assay are shown. p<0.05, otherwise, not significant. ec, effector chondrocyte; regc, regulatory chondrocyte; proc, proliferative chondrocyte; prehtc, prehypertrophic chondrocyte; fc, fibrocartilage chondrocyte; htc, hypertrophic chondrocyte; homc, homeostatic chondrocyte; oa, osteoarthritis; t-sne, t-distributed stochastic neighbour embedding.']. Reference sentences:[]
Summary: Correlation patterns between gene expressions in different chondrocyte subsets during human OA progression.

Text 253
10.1136/annrheumdis-2017-212863
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 1 single-cell rna-seq of human oa cartilage chondrocytes. (a) schematic workflow of the experimental strategy. (b) representative preoperative and postoperative radiographs of patients with knee oa undergoing arthroplasty. (c) pca plot of single-cell transcriptomes based on the 500 most variable genes. s0 to s4, stage 0 to 4. (d) beeswarm plot showing all filtered cells according to their coordinates along pc2 and coloured according to the oa stage of the cartilage sample. the cell density distribution of each stage along pc2 is shown below. (e) hierarchical clustering of cells (rows) using the 50 most positively correlated and 50 most negatively correlated genes (columns) along pc2. cells are classified into four clusters (left sidebar). the enriched go terms for the genes showing the greatest correlation along pc2 are shown below. (f) the expression levels of three representative genes showing positive and negative correlations along pc2. (g) the top 10 candidate transcription factors for early-stage (s0 and s1, yellow) and late-stage (s3 and s4, purple) oa identified by the master regulator analysis algorithm (marina). genes are rank-sorted according to their expression levels on the x-axis for regulators, with the p value depicting the enrichment significance. (h) boxplots showing the expression levels of early-stage and late-stage oa candidate transcription factors and p values representing the significance of expression levels. go, gene ontology; pca, principal component analysis; oa, osteoarthritis.']. Reference sentences:[]
Summary: Correlation patterns of gene expressions along PC2 in single-cell transcriptomes of human OA cartilage chondrocytes.

Text 254
10.1038/s41593-018-0192-3
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 4 | h3k27me3 is associated with suppressed clearance genes in stmg. a, schematic showing isolation of cross-linked microglial nuclei from striatum or cerebellum for h3k27me3 chromatin immunoprecipitation (chip)-sequencing. b, h3k27me3 enrichment at the transcriptional start site (tss) of genes in adult stmg or cbmg is negatively correlated with stmg gene expression. heatmaps (left) show the abundance of h3k27me3 (by model-based analysis of chip-seq (macs) software, n=1 each from 25 mice) ranked by log2(fold change) of h3k27me3 chip over input in microglia nuclei at the tss ±5 kb of individual genes. right: log2(fold change) from deseq2 (n=2 mice) of mrnas from microglia trap over their unbound fraction (stmg: p < 2.2 × 10–16, r=–0.4002547; cbmg: p < 2.2 × 10–16, r=–0.2161471; pearson correlation). c, h3k27me3 is differentially enriched at the tss of genes in cbmg vs. stmg. scatter plot shows counts of h3k27me3 spanning the tss ±1 kb for each gene in cbmg (x axis) vs. stmg (y axis). cbmg- (orange) and stmg-enriched (purple) genes that are differentially enriched in h3k27me3 (macs) in stmg and cbmg are depicted. d, genome browser views (igv) of selected genes show normalized counts of h3k27me3+ chromatin at the tss ±1 kb of the indicated genes in stmg or cbmg.']. Reference sentences:[notably we show that the trap approach not only allows for region-specific analysis of microglia-enriched mrna expres- sion (supplementary fig 3 and supplementary table 1) but also precludes nonspecific microglia activation and concurrent upregulation of immediate early and pro-inflammatory genes that occur during commonly used microglia isolation approaches (supplementary fig 4 and supplementary table 2).genome-wide analysis of h3k27me3 distribution in ex vivo isolated microglial nuclei (fig 4a) showed that the majority of transcription- ally suppressed genes in microglia were associated with h3k27me3 (fig 4b and supplementary fig 11a).at the same time we detected a substantial stmg-specific enrichment of h3k27me3 at the tran- scriptional start sites of cbmg-expressed clearance genes includ- ing axl ms4a7 and adamts18 as well as on the cbmg-enriched transcription factors rarg ahr and tead4 in stmg (fig 4cd and supplementary table 7).in contrast to stmg h3k27me3 was not present at clearance- related gene loci in cbmg (fig 4cd).]
Patterns of h3k27me3 enrichment at gene promoters are negatively correlated with gene expression in different microglia types.

Text 255
10.1186/s13073-018-0567-9
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 5 a hierarchical clustering of the correlation between each transformed subpopulation and a database of cell type-specific expression profiles with high variability across the data set. we find three cell type clusters referred to as neural/esc, immune, and mesenchymal/msc which divide the tumor cell subpopulations into three major groups. b gene ontology analysis of the differentially expressed genes between the group iii tumors (pj017/pj032) and the remaining tumors (pj016, pj018, pj025, pj030, pj035, pj048) after removal of genes specific to the untransformed immune cells in pj017 and pj032. the group iii tumors show a clear immunological gene signature that is specific to the transformed cells']. Reference sentences:[all cell types with a below-median standard deviation were then removed to enrich for cell types with high variation across our data set and the resulting correlation matrix was standardized and sub- jected to hierarchical clustering with a euclidean dis- tance metric using the clustermap function in the seaborn python module (fig 5a).figure 5b shows the results for the lowest-level gene ontologies (top 15 biological process on- tologies for each group) based on the panther gene ontology hierarchy (to avoid the use of extremely broad ontologies like “cell part”).figure 5a shows hierarchical clustering of correlation co- efficients between the average profile of each trans- formed subpopulation in our data set and the cell type-specific expression profiles in the curated database.the results in fig 5a are consistent with the notion that the tumors lacking clear neural lineage structure have undergone mesenchymal transformation.figure 5b shows that despite our stringent filter the transformed cells in pj017/pj032 express high levels of immune genes compared to the remaining tumors (additional file 1: table s3) thus indicating that tumor cells expressing an immune-like signature may recruit infiltration of mye- loid cells.however csf1 is most highly expressed in the transformed glioma cells pj017 and pj032 the two tu- mors with the highest immune signature correlation in fig 5a and the highest proportion of tumor-associated myeloid cells.]
Summary: Hierarchical clustering reveals correlation patterns between transformed cell subpopulations and cell type-specific expression profiles, identifying three major cell type clusters. Gene ontology analysis highlights immunological gene signatures in specific tumor cell subpopulations.

Text 256
10.1038/s41586-018-0394-6
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 4 | pulmonary ionocytes are a major source of cftr activity. a, immunofluorescence for krt5 (green) and foxi1 (red) in mouse tracheae at homeostasis (left, n=3) or 3 dpi (right, n=3). arrowhead, foxi1+krt5+ cells; arrow, foxi1+krt5− cell. scale bars, 20 μm. b, immunofluorescence and quantification for ionocytes (foxi1+, red, arrowheads) and ciliated cells (foxj1+, green) in hbec cultures treated with dmso or dapt. scale bar, 100 μm; n=4 experiments from one donor. p=0.01, p=1.1×10−6 by two-tailed t-test. c, hbecs were treated with dmso or dapt upon ali culture. after differentiation (2–3 weeks), cultures were loaded into ussing chambers and short-circuit current (isc) was recorded during addition of amiloride, forskolin, and a cftr inhibitor, cftr(inh)-172. a representative tracing from donor 1 (n=11) is shown. d, change in short-circuit current (δisc) in response to forskolin measured in dmso (n=7 cultures per donor) or dapt-treated cultures (n=8 cultures per donor). p <1×10−8 by two-tailed t-test. e, donor mean δisc in response to forskolin plotted against mean number of ionocytes (foxi1+) or ciliated cells (foxj1+) (n=7). all data are mean±s.e.m. r, pearson correlation with associated p value. ns, not significant.']. Reference sentences:[immunofluorescence of krt4 in mouse tracheal epithelium demonstrated that it was co-enriched in subsets of krt5+ basal cells krt8+ luminal cells and scgb1a1+ club (secretory) cells but not in foxj1+ ciliated cells (extended data fig 4a).we confirmed the existence of this cluster by immunofluorescence showing that foxn4 was indeed enriched in a subset of foxj1high cells but not in cells containing mature cilia (extended data fig 4b).immunostaining demonstrated apical enrichment of the v-atpase in foxi1+ hbecs similar to what has been shown for other foxi1+ epithelial lineages202123 as well as nerve growth factor receptor (ngfr extended data fig 4c) confirming the marker gene enrichment identified by scrna-seq (extended data fig 1b).foxi1+ cells first reappeared in the basal cell pool following injury depletion (extended data fig 5c) and foxi1 co-localization with the basal cell marker krt5 transiently increased after injury (46.3% of foxi1+ cells at 3 dpi compared to 15.4% at steady state; fig 4a).dapt treatment also significantly decreased the number of ionocytes (fig 4b).to examine cftr activity in the proximal airway epithelium we recorded cftr- mediated ion transport in hbec cultures using ussing chambers30 (fig 4c).dapt-treated cultures which reduce the number of ionocytes and increase the number of ciliated cells had significantly lower cftr activity in response to forskolin (measured as short-circuit current isc; fig 4d).ussing experiments and cell-type quantification in cultures derived from seven different donors showed that cftr activity was positively correlated with ionocyte number (pearson’s r = 0.83 p = 0.02) and not correlated with ciliated cell num- ber (r = 0.44 p = 0.32) with ionocytes explaining 60% of the mean channel current compared to just 4% for ciliated cells (after multivariate regression) (fig 4e).letter research extended data fig 4 | validation of novel lineages in mouse and human by immunofluorescence.]
Patterns related to correlation between ionocyte number and cftr activity in response to forskolin in airway epithelium.

Text 257
10.1371/journal.pgen.1007552
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 2. atoh1-mediated sc-to-hc conversion is a continuum. (a) high resolution map of scs (dcs/pcs), chcs, and hcs determined in fig 1d. the hcs, scs (dcs/pcs), and atoh1+ cells were chosen and pca followed by tsne analyses were performed. distinct colors were used for different conditions. coch p12: cochlea at p12 with no tamoxifen-induction, coch + tmx p26: cochlea at p26 after tamoxifeninduction, coch + tmx p33: cochlea at p33 after tamoxifen-induction, coch p33: cochlea at p33 with no tamoxifen-induction. each ellipse represents the 95% confident region for each cell-type. (b) pseudo-temporal ordering analysis. sc1 (black), chc1 (dark red), chc2 (vivid red), and chc3 (vivid orange) cells were placed into two-dimensional space using monocle (see methods). black line indicates the conversion path. (c) heatmap of hc marker and tf gene expression contributing to cell fate change from sc1 to chc3 (lower panel) from red (maximum value for each gene in log2(expected count + 1) to blue (minimum value for each gene in log2(expected count + 1). pseudotime was horizontally represented from left as a starting point to right as an end in 100 bins. (d) atoh1-ha expression across pseudotime fig 2b. (e) correlation between atoh1-ha and endogenous atoh1 expression. r2 indicates the correlation coefficient. the units used were log2(expected count + 1). (f) gene network analysis showing correlated tf genes. expression levels of tf genes were extracted and pearson’s correlations between them were calculated. significantly correlated genes with r2 > 0.25 were connected by an edge. the shorter the line is, the stronger the correlation is while the longer the line is, the weaker the correlation is. distinct groups determined by maximizing modularity q [61] were indicated using distinct colors.']. Reference sentences:[we then performed tsne on this subset of the data followed by shared nearest neighbor modular- ity optimization based clustering which identified 7 unique clusters (fig 2a s2 fig and s2 table; figure legends).the scs also separated into two clusters with almost all sc1 cells coming from p12 cochleae while almost all sc2 cells were isolated from p26-33 cochleae (fig 2a s1a and s2 figs).the chcs separated into three distinct clusters (chc1-3) (fig 2a).closer examination of marker expression in these cells found that canonical hc markers chrna10 and pou4f3 were almost uniquely expressed in chc3 suggesting they are the most mature among chcs and that there is a progression from sc1 to chc1 to chc2 to chc3 [14 21] (fig 2c and fig 2a).with this approach the cells ordered along the anticipated trajectory of hc conversion starting with sc1 to chc1 to chc2 to chc3 (fig 2b).while transitioning from chc1-2 to chc3 canonical hc markers (myo6 rasd2 chrna9 pvalb pou4f3 chrna10) started to be expressed (fig 2c).to identify additional tfs that may be required to increase the efficiency and completion of atoh1-mediated hc conversion we plotted the expression of tfs that were found to be nonrandomly expressed across pseudotime using the beaming algorithm imbedded in mono- cle2 (fig 2c).in our data endogenous atoh1 increases as conversion progresses (s2a fig); transgenic atoh1-ha expression strongly corre- lates with converted hc state (fig 2d and s2a fig) with chc3 expressing a 3.29 fold more atoh1-ha than chc1.this is unexpected because transgenic atoh1-ha is driven by cag promoter in cre-positive cells which should presumably have ubiquitously constant levels of fig 2.moreover quantification of endogenous atoh1 using the 3’utr and exogenous atoh1-ha using the ha tag we found a strong correlation between the expression of both genes in each cell (r2 = 0.86; fig 2e).at least detected in 10 cells) to remove noisy genes and that also had high variance in expression across cells (variance >0.4) (fig 2f).this approach revealed several tfs that could potentially increase the efficiency of conversion including barhl1 lhx3 nfia and pou4f3 many of which were also highly expressed in chc3 cells in our single-cell rna-seq analysis (fig 2c and s2a fig).(a) higher resolution map of scs chcs and hcs determined in fig 2a with expression levels of cell type-specific markers.(b) fine resolution map of scs chcs and hcs determined in fig 2a with expression levels of tf genes obtained by gene network analysis in fig 2f.the colors placed above the two-dimen- sional spaces are corresponding to those in fig 2f.this table is associated with fig 2.]
Summary: Correlation between atoh1-ha and endogenous atoh1 expression, gene network analysis of correlated tf genes, and progression from sc1 to chc3.

Text 258
10.1371/journal.pgen.1007552
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figs). as atoh1 induction occurs at p12, we used the sc1 cluster as the starting points for the induction of chcs. the chcs separated into three distinct clusters (chc1-3) (fig 2a). closer examination of marker expression in these cells found that canonical hc markers chrna10 and pou4f3 were almost uniquely expressed in chc3 suggesting they are the most mature among chcs and that there is a progression from sc1 to chc1 to chc2 to chc3 [14, 21] (fig 2c and fig 2a). one important implication of this finding is that studying the previously unrecognized chc1 and chc2 that had undergone less complete conversion could identify factors that are needed to increase conversion efficiency. to provide additional evidence that there is a continuum of cells present during hc conversion, we next ordered the cells in pseudotime with inverse graph embedding using monocle2 [24]. the pseudotime reconstruction places individual cells in two-dimensional space in an unsupervised manner based on the relative transcription profiles of each cell. with this approach, the cells ordered along the anticipated trajectory of hc conversion starting with sc1 to chc1 to chc2 to chc3 (fig 2b). while transitioning from chc1-2 to chc3, canonical hc markers (myo6, rasd2, chrna9, pvalb, pou4f3, chrna10) started to be expressed (fig 2c). thus, inverse graph embedding of scs undergoing atoh1-mediated conversion further supported a continuum from a donor sc to a target state that resembled hcs. to identify additional tfs that may be required to increase the efficiency and completion of atoh1-mediated hc conversion, we plotted the expression of tfs that were found to be nonrandomly expressed across pseudotime using the beaming algorithm imbedded in monocle2 (fig 2c). as expected, tfs associated with the terminal differentiation of scs, such as rorb, rora, id1, id4, id2 [25, 26], decreased in expression as cells began undergoing atoh1mediated conversion. there was then a second cluster of genes that transiently increased in expression in chc1, such as hes5, hes1, sox9, zbtb20 and members of the ap-1 complex (fos, junb, jun). subsequently, the chc2 cluster was enriched with tfs such as hes6, insm1, jund and egr1, in addition to endogenous atoh1 and exogenous atoh1-ha. finally, the chc3 cluster highly expressed known hc tfs such as barhl1, lhx3, pou4f3 and neurod6 [27–30]. it has been shown that the expression of endogenous atoh1 is upregulated during naturally occurring hc conversion in zebrafish and birds [31–34]. in our data, endogenous atoh1 increases as conversion progresses (s2a fig); transgenic atoh1-ha expression strongly correlates with converted hc state (fig 2d and s2a fig), with chc3 expressing a 3.29 fold more atoh1-ha than chc1. this is unexpected because transgenic atoh1-ha is driven by cag promoter in cre-positive cells which should presumably have ubiquitously constant levels of']. Reference sentences:[]
Summary: Progression of cell states from initial to mature stages during conversion, with expression changes in transcription factors and markers correlating with the conversion process.

Text 259
10.1016/j.cell.2018.07.007
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure s5. operational definition of sgn subtypes according to calb2 intensity, related to figure 4 (a and b) wholemount cochlea from mafbcreert2; ai9 animals were double-stained for calb2 (green) and tdtomato (red). individual tdtomato labeled sgns could be traced from their cell bodies to the organ of corti, shown in a top down (xy) view (top). position in the osl was assessed in cross-sectional (xz) views through confocal image stacks (below). calb2 intensities in cell bodies and processes were correlated for each neuron. examples of one calb2+ sgn (yellow arrow) and one calb2low sgn (white arrow) are shown, with quantification for all analyzed sgns in b. (c and d) sgn subtypes were operationally defined based on calb2 levels. k-means clustering of all measured calb2 ﬂuorescence intensities in fibers revealed that the expression values are best split into three clusters (red dotted line, c). fibers were divided into low (n = 113), medium (n = 78), and high (n = 116) calb2+ groups as defined by the k-means cluster boundaries, indicated by colored shading in a histogram of all analyzed fibers (n = 214, 5 animals). (e) cross-sectional views (xz) through the osl of chatcre;ai14 cochlear wholemount preparations immunostained for calb2 (green) and tdtomato (red). chatcre;ai14 labels olivocochlear efferents. dotted lines indicate the upper limit (toward sv), mid-point and lower limit (toward st) of the afferent fiber bundle. (f and g) histograms show even distribution of efferent fibers (red) but sv-biased distribution of low calb2 (blue) fibers in the osl (f). the average number of fibers per region is quantified in g. error bars in g represent sd. p values indicate results of kolmogorov–smirnov (ks) test (f) and results of tukey’s hsd test following one-way anova (g). scale bars: 10 mm.']. Reference sentences:[]
Summary: Correlation between calb2 intensity levels in single cells, leading to operational definition of subtypes based on expression patterns.

Text 260
10.1016/j.celrep.2018.07.025
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 3. identification of cell types and signatures across early mammary epithelial development (a) nmf correlation matrix of single cells (clusters/rank = 6) with nmf sample groups 1–6 numbered and color-coded. also shown and color-coded are the developmental stages of isolation for each cell, and subclusters (a and b) derived for adult cells and nmf groups 5 and 6 independently of the correlation matrix shown. (b) relationships between single-cell profiles graphed according to the first three diffusion components, and color-coded by stage of origin. s = 129. (c) dc1 and two positions for the epithelial nmf groups. s = 55. (d) violin plots showing expression levels of luminal-associated krt8 and basal-associated krt14 among cells of nmf groups 2 and 3. (e) a simplified schematic of the approximate positions of nmf subclusters in the two-dimensional (2d) diffusion map from (c). (f) a schematic describing the rank product-based procedure for defining group-specific signatures. (g) heatmap of signature expression with cells sorted by nmf group with annotation of select genes. rows, gene expression values. columns, samples (i.e., single cells). mean signature enrichment per cell is also given (bottom). (h) graphical representation of go categories for the fmasc signature. (i) mean expression in individual cells of a luminal balancer signature and a basal balancer signature. also shown is the mean expression of differentially expressed gene lists delineating the prominent subdivision of mmpr cells. brackets, pearson correlation. (j) mean expression of the differentially expressed gene lists for nmf5a versus nmf5b (i.e., fmasc subdivision). ordering of cells from (g) is maintained in (i) and (j).']. Reference sentences:[similar to our chromium-based analysis adult cells and e18 cells occupied opposite ends of the resulting graph along one dc axis (dc1) with p1 and p4 cells occupying intermediate po- sitions (figure 3b).this unsupervised differential expres- sion analysis led us to denote the small cluster nmf1 as ‘‘matrix’’-expressing cells based on their expression of mesen- chymal/matrix-related transcripts (e.g. col1 3 5 6 12 15 18; fn1; vim) and to denote nmf4 as ‘‘immune’’-related cells based on their expression of class ii transcripts (e.g. b2m; fcer1g; h2-aa ab1 eb1 m2 q6 q7 t22) (figure 3g).the analysis also confirmed the adult basal and luminal phenotypes of nmf2 and -3 respectively as it re-identi- fied a known basal and luminal markers for each group (skibinski et al. 2014) (figure 3g; table s2).gene ontology (go) enrichment analysis re- vealedthatthefmascsignaturecomprisesgenesinvolvedinava- riety of cellular processes of potential importance for stem and progenitor cells including cellular metabolism chromatin confor- mation cell cycle and tissue development (maere et al. 2005; shannon et al. 2003) (figure 3h).as the data imply that fmascs are defined both by the unique features captured in the fmasc signature and by co-expression figure 3.to this end we examined the results of rank product tests between nmf2 -3 and -5 cells (adult luminal adult basal and fmasc groups respectively) to identify a set of genes termed ‘‘balancer’’ signa- tures (figure 3i; table s3).similarly we generated a ‘‘luminal balancer signature’’ (i.e. genes expressed by both luminal cells and fmascs more highly than basal cells) of 477 genes including for example cd24a and krt8 (figure 3i; table s3).the co-expression of these balancer signatures in individual fmasc and their lineage-specific expression later in develop- ment is illustrated in figure 3i.loss of lineage factor balance shortly after birth nmf6 cells principally derive from postnatal mammary epithelia and have an expression signature (234 genes) composed of tran- scription factors such as jun rela/b nfkb2 and sox4 chro- matin modifiers including arid1atop2a jmjd1c and jmjd6 cell adhesion and cell-cell junction proteins including claudins 1 and 6 icam and many others (figure 3f; table s2).we could subdivide nmf5 and nmf6 into two subclusters each with high cluster stability (nmf5a and -b cc = 0.96; nmf6a and -b cc = 0.88) (figure 3a).rather when subclusters from nmf5 (nmf5a and -b) were derived and contrasted their differentially expressed genes correlated with graded expression of the fmasc signature derived from the undivided nmf5 cluster (figure 3j).changes in chromatin regulation and accessibility accompany fmasc differentiation the go enrichment for chromatin regulators was of particular in- terest as it could help explain the multipotent expression pattern identified in fmascs (figure 3h).fmasc metabolic profiles are lost during differentiation metabolic factors are overwhelmingly represented among the fmasc-signa- ture gene ontologies (figure 3h).]
Correlation patterns between cell types and signatures in early development, including differential gene expression and lineage-specific signatures.

Text 261
10.1016/j.celrep.2018.07.025
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 1. derivation and clustering of mouse mammary epithelial single-cell transcriptomes from embryonic development to adulthood (a) isolation and sequencing of mammary cells from different developmental stages. two strategies are shown, chromium drop-seq (103 genomics) and c1-microﬂuidic capture (fluidigm), with differential output (gray box). (b) tsne plot of single-cell transcriptomes from indicated developmental stages. (c) the plot in (b), overlaid with relative expression levels of mammary lineage markers. (d) nmf clustering of single-cell expression profiles (n = 6,059), shown by the white-to-black correlation scale. colored bars correspond to developmental context (right; y axis) or nmf group (x axis). (e) projection of nmf groups identified in (d) onto the tsne plot from (b). (f) tsne plots for adult basal (epcam+, cd49f+, left panel) and e18 cells (right panel) isolated, processed, and plotted separately with colors corresponding to the nmf grouping in (d).']. Reference sentences:[apart from these cells adult cells comprised three ma- jor clusters p4 cells comprised two clusters and e16 and e18 cells comprised one cluster each (figure 1b).however we note that lineage-associated markers are often imperfect in that they show sporadic expression in other adult groups (figure 1c).the data also show that individual cells from earlier developmental stages often express multiple lineage markers (figure 1c).for example while a minority of p4 cells exhibit a basal profile the majority manifest luminal and alveolar features (e.g. krt8 csn3 and cd14 expression) in addition to krt14 (figure 1).we examined these populations alone by tsne to attempt to identify minority stem cell clusters (figure 1f).we provide a figure 1.color coding is also given for nmf groups and developmental stage as in figure 1d.a continuum of gene expression profiles defines early stem cell state transitions in the mammary gland to gain a more highly detailed view of changing gene expres- sion patterns over the critical period in early development where multipotent fmasc generate more committed cells in the postnatal mammary epithelium (figures 2 and s3) (ma- karem et al. 2013a; spike et al. 2012) we obtained deeper transcriptomes of single cells across the e18-to-p4 transition using the c1 microﬂuidics platform (fluidigm) with inclusion of adult cells for reference (figure 1a; table s2).]
Patterns related to correlation between gene expression profiles and developmental stages in mammary epithelial cells.

Text 262
10.1016/j.cell.2018.06.021
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 6. neuronal cell types are spatially restricted examples of inferred spatial distributions for cell types across the brain. the left column shows reference images from the allen brain atlas. each row shows one coronal section, ordered rostrocaudally, and each column shows one cluster as indicated at the top. for every cluster and every voxel, the correlation coefficient is depicted by the colormap (dark high, white low). labels indicate the top-scoring anatomical unit for each cluster. see also figure s5.']. Reference sentences:[this is reminiscent of the role of the hoxd cluster during digit teglu2 atlas teglu12 teglu9 teglu15 teglu22 deinh2 mbdop2 hbinh9 meglu6 hbglu1 cortex/hc cortex/hc thalamus gc ob nbl msn cholinergic monoaminergic telencephalon projecting telencephalon inhibitory peptidergic spinal cord di-/mesencephalon hindbrain cns neurons layer 6b layer 6 barrel cortex layer 5 cingulate cortex basolateral amygdala piriform cortex reticular nucleus thalamus snc/vta superior colliculus paragiganto- cellular nucleus inferior olivary complex figure 6.spatial distribution of all telencephalon excitatory projecting neurons related to figure 6 dendrogram above shows the hierarchical structure as in figure 1c.]
Spatial distribution of cell types across the brain based on correlation coefficients.

Text 263
10.1016/j.cell.2018.06.021
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure s5. spatial distribution of all telencephalon excitatory projecting neurons, related to figure 6 dendrogram above shows the hierarchical structure as in figure 1c. left, reference atlas annotation (allen brain atlas). each column shows the expression map of an individual cluster, where dark brown is high and white is low correlation.']. Reference sentences:[]
Summary: Spatial distribution of correlation patterns among different cell clusters in the telencephalon excitatory projecting neurons.

Text 264
10.1016/j.cell.2018.07.028
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 3. a prevalent expression program in neurons related to axon structure and presynaptic function (a) hierarchical clustering of pairwise pearson correlations of gene-loading scores for biological ics from 45 neuronal subclustering analyses. (right) enlargement of boxed region. correlation blocks correspond to the immediate early gene (ieg) transcriptional state, thalamus-specific ics (th), or ‘‘neurofilament’’ ics, which are contributed from different regions and driven by genes that encode neurofilament subunits and other proteins involved in ca2+ handling, vesicle exocytosis, and membrane excitability. (b) the neurofilament transcriptional signal (ic 17) in frontal cortex sst+/pvalb+ interneurons (cluster 2). (left) ic 17 cell loadings displayed on subcluster t-sne plot. (right) gene-loading plot with the top 20 genes shown.']. Reference sentences:[h gabra1 kcnc1 pvalb erbb4 syt2 lgi2 sparcl1 kcnip2 phlda1 scn1a plxna4 nefh mef2c gad1 prss23 kcna1 kcnh7 slc4a4 ptpre ldhb 0.6 -0.6 0 0.3 -0.3 2693 cells ic 18 710 nuclei nuclei pvalb sst -1correlation (r) 1 figure 3.(legend continued on next page) 1020 cell 174 1015–1030 august 9 2018 of pairwise correlations across neuronal ic gene loadings re- vealed three prominent correlation blocks (figure 3a).furthermore neurofilament ic cell loading was visible among pvalb+ interneurons following drop-seq analysis of 28194 single nuclei isolated from ﬂash- frozen frontal cortex (figure 3h).this collection contained neurofilament genes (figure 3) ion channels (e.g. hcn2) and unexpected genes such as the tran- scription factor foxj1 and the creatine transporter slc6a8.top 10 loading genes suggest a neurofilament-type signal (figure 3).]
Patterns of gene expression correlations in neuronal subclusters related to neurofilament transcriptional state and functional properties.

Text 265
10.1016/j.cell.2018.07.028
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure s1. comprehensive identification of brain cell classes, related to figure 1 (a) example single-cell suspension generated from frontal cortex that contained little debris and exhibited diverse cellular morphologies. bottom, enlargements of example cells. (b) t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding (tsne) plot of gene expression relationships among the n = 113,171 cell hippocampus dataset based on the first round of ica-based clustering (see figure 1b). left, tsne plot color-coded based on ‘‘global’’ clusters (numbered 1-19). right, tsne plot color-coded based on major cell classes of the brain. (c) violin plots showing example gene markers that distinguish across and within brain cell classes (log10). genes are color-coded by cell class. global clusters are ordered by cell class. (d) cartoons of the major cell classes of the brain. numbers below indicate the corresponding global clusters from hippocampus. (e) dot plots displaying the proportional representation of individual cell classes across regions. the major trend suggests that neuronal proportions vary inversely with those of oligodendrocytes, endothelial cells, and mural cells. fibroblast-like cells comprised a similar proportion of all cells in each region. polydendrocyte and astrocyte abundance appeared to vary independently of other cell classes, exhibiting enrichment in the gpe as expected based on earlier findings (cui et al., 2016). small fractions of choroid plexus and ependymal cells were sampled from ventricle-adjacent regions, while sparse neurogenic populations were observed in regions adjacent to the subventricular and subgranular zones (frontal cortex, striatum, and hippocampus) (ming and song, 2011). these trends could be driven both by endogenous regional variation and differences in tissue preparation (table s1). (f) number of subclusters by region. (g) transcriptional correlations across atlas subclusters are largely explained by cell class and not region of origin. hierarchical clustering diagram showing pairwise pearson correlation scores calculated pairwise between 565 atlas subcluster populations. the analysis was restricted to genes with significantly variable expression (star methods). color-coded bars at the top of the plot display the ordered region/cell class assignments for the subcluster.']. Reference sentences:[]
Summary: Correlations in gene expression patterns across different cell classes in the brain are shown, independent of region of origin.

Text 266
10.1016/j.cell.2018.07.028
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 4. inferring ion channel gene-gene co-expression relationships across hundreds of brain cell types and states (a and b) nicotinic acetylcholine receptor (nachr) subunit co-expression correlations across 565 brain cell populations. (a) hierarchical clustering of pairwise correlations of n = 16 nachr subunit genes (color coded by family). (b) scatterplots of subunit expression (log10 scale). (c–e) correlation structure among voltage-gated (vg) na and k channels measured from 323 neuronal populations. (c) hierarchical clustering of pairwise expression correlations. the vgk (n = 17) and vgna (n = 1) alpha subunit families are color coded and labeled. the correlation block containing channels known to control firing rate is shown with an arrow. (d–e) select pairwise subunit expression correlations. neuronal populations known to exhibit fast firing rates are shown in red (figure s3d). slc6a8 and hcn2 were frequently correlated with the alpha subunit genes that putatively encode firing rate (figure s3d). see also figure s3.']. Reference sentences:[across cell populations expression of nachr genes exhibited two prominent correlation blocks each containing genes that encode subunits of known heteromeric a/b channels (zoli et al. 2015) (figure 4a).for example expression of chrna3 and chrnb4 (known to form functional receptors) was positively correlated across a large range (from 0.01 to 100 transcripts per 100000) (figure 4b).we observed strong correlation blocks involving specific subsets of vgk and vgna genes (figure 4c).one set of co-expressed genes encoded proteins that enable fast and persistent action potentials including the kcnc1-3 (kv3.1) kcna1 (kv1.1) and scn8a (nav1.6) channels (chen et al. 2008; goldberg et al. 2008; rudy and mcbain 2001) (figure 4d).fast-firing cell types a b c d e figure 4.expressed high levels of kcnc2/kcnc1 and scn1a/scn8a variable levels of kcnc4 and low levels of scn2a1 whose expression was inversely correlated with kcnc1-3 and scn1a (figure 4d).indeed expression of slc6a8 and hcn2 were strongly correlated and high in fast-firing cell types (figure 4e).identifying ion channel gene-gene co-expression relationships from hundreds of cell populations related to figure 4 (a) the number of individual single-cell profiles that contribute to each of the 565 transcriptionally-similar cell populations identified in the atlas (median = 171 cells mean = 565).(e) genes most frequently correlated with the n = 15 genes that make up the correlation block associated with action potential firing rate (figure 4d).]
Patterns of gene-gene correlations in ion channel expression across diverse cell populations, including those related to firing rate control.

Text 267
10.1126/science.aau0730
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 4. linking cis-regulatory elements to regulated genes based on covariance in single cell co-assay data. (a) top: genome browser plot showing links between accessible distal regulatory sites and the gene slc6a18. the height corresponds to the correlation coefficient. bottom: barplots showing the average expression, promoter accessibility and linked site accessibility for cell type-specific marker gene slc6a18 across different cell types. gene expression values for each cell were calculated by dividing the raw umi count by cell-specific size factors. site accessibilities for each cell were calculated by dividing the raw read count by cell-specific size factors. error bars represent standard errors of the means. (b) two linear regression models were built to predict gene expression differences between cell types. the first model predicts changes on the basis of promoter accessibility alone. the second model predicts changes based on the chromatin accessibility of the promoter and distal sites that are linked to it. the boxplot shows the cross-validated r-squared calculated for each gene from the two models.']. Reference sentences:[however from our covariance approach its tss is linked to a site 16 kb away whose accessibility is correlated with slc6a18 expression (fig 4a).including linked distal sites improved predictions by four-fold (p-value < 5e-5 paired permutation test based on 20000 simulations; fig 4b).]
Patterns of correlation between gene expression and regulatory site accessibility across different cell types were identified, improving gene expression predictions by incorporating linked distal sites.

Text 268
10.1186/s40478-018-0584-3
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 1 single-cell analysis identified disease stage-specific microglial populations in a transient model of neurodegeneration. a scheme of single microglial cell gene expression analysis after facial nerve axotomy (fnx) in 8 weeks old female cx3cr1gfp/+ mice. microglia from contralateral facial nuclei (fn) of non-operated healthy mice (0 d) were used as baseline control for steady state transcriptome. microglia from both fn of mice at peak of disease (7 d after fnx) and onset of recovery (30 d after fnx) were analyzed. a coronal brain section from 7 d after fnx at peak of disease is shown to indicate the locations of the fn (orange dotted circles) from which gfp+ cd45lo cd11b+ microglia were index-sorted by facs for rna sequencing. b quantification of gfp+ fn microglia after fnx. each symbol represents mean count per animal. n = 4 mice per group. two-way anova and one-tailed paired t-tests showed significant difference between time and between fn at peak of disease (7 d) and onset of recovery (30 d). c representative images of gfp+ fn microglia (green) at peak of disease (7 d) after fnx. 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (dapi) nuclear counterstain is in blue. scale bar: 30 μm. d t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding (t-sne) representations of 944 microglial cells from contralateral (left) and ipsilateral (right) fn based on transcriptomic analysis. the proximity of cells reflects transcriptome similarity as measured by pearson’s correlation. cells from contralateral fn are represented by open circles in black, red and green for disease-free (0 d), peak of disease (7 d) and onset of recovery (30 d), respectively. cells from the injured fn are shown as open squares in red and green for 7 and 30 d and contributed significantly to the distinct “tail” population. cells from all groups were distributed uniformly in the cloud. see table 1 for contribution of cells per mouse. n = 3 mice per stage. e cluster analysis based on transcriptome similarities of all 944 microglial cells revealed 10 clusters (c1-c10) of which c4 (52 cells), c8 (27 cells) and c9 (15 cells) belong to the disease-associated tail of the t-sne map (top). tail clusters exhibit 101 differentially expressed genes (see additional file 1: figure s1) in comparison to the cloud clusters (p < 0.05). microglial cells from injured fn at 7 d and 30 d after fnx contribute to the tail as in (d). cloud clusters (850 cells) reveal a homogeneous population of microglia in contralateral and lesion groups with minor heterogeneity in gene expression levels. the heat map shows the enrichment of microglial cells belonging to each group in clusters c1-c10 (bottom). the color legend depicts an enrichment score [−log10(p-value+ 10− 3)], where the p-value is calculated by a hypergeometric test. t-sne representations of total facs sorted microglia (944 cells) show the relative fluorescence intensities (color legend) of surface markers cd45, cd11b and mhc class ii, and endogenous gfp mapped to single cx3cr1+ microglia. g ma plot of the 101 differentially expressed genes (see additional file 1: figure s1) that distinguish the cloud and tail (comprising c4, c8 and c9 contributed by microglial cells from injured fn at 7 d and 30 d after fnx) transcriptomes in (e). ten selected upregulated (red) and down-regulated (blue) genes with a minimum of two-fold change (benjamini-hochberg-corrected p < 0.05) are indicated. non-regulated expressed genes are shown in gray. h representative gene ontology (go) terms for the neurodegeneration-associated microglial gene signature represented by the 101 differentially expressed genes in (g)']. Reference sentences:[to understand the relatedness of the cells based on their transcriptomes we performed scrnaseq of microglia isolated from the contralateral and injured fn at stages representing disease-free (0 d) peak of disease (7 d after fnx) and onset of recovery following microglio- sis (30 d after fnx) (fig 1a-c).after quality control data from a total of 944 cells from which 15245 genes were quantified were further analyzed using our raceid2 algorithm [16] and depicted in t-distributed stochastic neighbor embed- ding (t-sne) representations (fig 1d-f; table 1).microglia from all groups distributed uniformly in the “cloud” whereas cells that clustered separately in the “tail” were derived solely from 7 and 30 d lesion groups indicating that the tail comprises disease stage-specific microglia (fig 1d).our transcriptome-based cluster analysis of all 944 microglial cells using the raceid2 algorithm iden- tified ten clusters (c1-c10) of which cells from c4 c8 and c9 mapped mainly to the tail (fig 1e).other clus- ters (c1-c3 c5-c7 and c10) were identified within the cloud representing less distinct subpopulations of microglia with variations in the expression levels of similarly expressed genes (fig 1e).analysis of surface markers revealed corresponding enrichment of the ac- tivation markers cd45 and mhc class ii in cells within the tail (fig 1f).notably these differences at the levels of gene and protein expression did not cor- relate directly to cell morphology as most microglia within the injured fn appeared to have similarly retracted their ramifications and assumed amoeboid and rod-like shapes typical of activated microglia (fig 1c).differential gene expression analysis of cloud versus tail clusters (benjamini-hochberg-corrected p < 0.05) identified 101 differentially expressed genes (fig 1g additional file 1: figure s1).the genes upregulated during neurodegeneration were enriched for the gene ontology (go) terms related to immune response lipid mediation neuronal cell death and migration of microglia (fig 1h).closer examination of neurodegeneration-associated tail microglial cells re- vealed that cluster c9 comprises transcriptomes from the 30 d lesion group (fig 1d-e; table 1).strong upregulation of apolipoprotein e (apoe) and chemokine ligand 5 (ccl5) and down-regulation of cystatin 3 (cst3) and secreted protein acidic and rich in cysteine or osteonectin (sparc) in single microglial cells distinguished c9 from c4 and c8 in the tail (fig 1e 3).the fraction of c9 microglia to all cells from 30 d lesion (fig 1d; table 1) is reflected at the level of protein expres- sion (fig 3f-g).a-b t-sne maps of a 944 microglial cells from fnx acute neurodegeneration in susceptibility gene-free cx3cr1gfp/+ mice (as in fig 1d-e) and b 3896 microglial cells from chronic neurodegeneration fad model [21] based on raceid2 transcriptomic analysis.ma plot of the 101 differentially expressed genes that distinguish the cloud and tail (in fig 1d-e) in the fnx neurodegeneration model.see fig 1d-e.]
Summary: Transcriptomic analysis revealed disease stage-specific microglial clusters, with distinct gene expression patterns correlating with neurodegeneration progression.

Text 269
10.1038/s41467-018-06033-3
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 6 sg neuron types in new born mice and comparative analysis of their transcriptome with adult sg neurons. a t-sne of sg neurons showing four different clusters at p3. b violin plots showing the expression of marker genes in log-transformed scale. c in vivo validation of the identified neuron types by immunohistochemical and ﬂuorescent in situ hybridization using identified marker genes in p3 cochlea. type ii sg neurons were identified by peripherin (peri), plk5, etv4 (etv4gfp transgenic mouse), th, and gabrg2. ia neurons were identified by pou4f1, runx1, and cr. ib neurons were identified by runx1 and pou4f1 and ic neurons, by rxrg, pcdh20, and cr expression. lypd1 and calb1 expression could not distinguish type ia from ib neurons at this stage. note that co-localization on sections could never be observed for markers expressed in different populations of neurons in the scnraseq data. d gene set enrichment analysis of p3 type i and type ii sg neurons visualized by network. e correlation analysis of sg neuron types from adult and p3 stages, using average expression of all differentially expressed genes as input. f, g visualization of sg neuron types from adult and p3 stages using tsne, revealing the conserved subclass identities between the two samples. h volcano plots of gene expression differences between adult and p3 sg neuron types for type ia (top panel) and type ii (bottom panel). genes differentially expressed in adult or p3 are marked by red or blue dots respectively. scale bar: 20 μm (c)']. Reference sentences:[combined with cr immunostaining to label the projections of type ia and ic neurons this sparse labeling strategy revealed on cross-sections and in cochlea whole mount that tom+ ib fibers consistently innervated the modiolar side of ihc while cr+ ia and ic fibers the pillar side (fig 5c supplementary fig 6a-c).importantly both cr and tom positive fibers did not co- localize with synaptotagmin positive pre-synaptic nerve end- ings underneath the ihcs excluding the possibility that these fibers were efferents (supplementary fig 6b-c-e).a quantitative analysis of cr+ (only in ia/ic neurons) vs pv+ (in all neurons) fibers underneath the ihcs in cochlea whole mount of wt mice further confirmed the specific projection of ib neurons to the modiolar and of the ia/ic neurons to the pillar (ia/ic) side of the ihcs (fig 5d–f supplementary fig 6d-e).unbiased clustering of 478 sg neurons from p3 cochlea mice revealed again four distinct types of sg neurons in proportion similar (p > 0.05) to those observed in adult mice (fig 6a supplementary fig 7a-b).the type ic and ii neurons were characterized respectively by a specific transient expression of cxcl14 and etv4 (pea3) (fig 6b c; supplementary fig 7c) distinguishing the two types from adult stages.interestingly both epha4 and prph described previously as early postnatal type i and type ii neuron markers respectively1340 were more widely expressed with epha4 found in all neuron types and prph in both type ii and ic neurons (fig 6b supplementary fig 7c-f; supplementary data 3 4).through gsea of p3 sg neuron types we observed that “neurogenesis” and “morphogenesis/neuronal projection” were among go terms with the highest representation in type ii neurons (fig 6d).by contrast the most enriched term in type i neurons concerned genes associated with metabolism as was described earlier for the adult type i group (fig 6d).in line with this a correlation analysis of adult and p3 sg neuron types revealed high similarity between the two stages (fig 6e–g).the p-value for all volcano plots are shown in the fig 6 to keep the consistency between all neuronal subclasses since the type ii subclass has only seven cells in our data set and multiplicity adjusted p- values cannot be applied for this group.]
Correlation patterns between adult and p3 single-cell neuron types show conserved subclass identities. Gene expression differences between stages are visualized in volcano plots.

Text 270
10.1038/s41598-018-32343-z
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 1. identification of salivary gland epithelial cell clusters by single-cell rna sequencing. (a) salivary gland epithelial cell transcriptomes visualized with t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedded (t-sne), colored according to unsupervised clustering. (b) hierarchical clustering analysis based on the log-transformed mean expression values of the 7 clusters. the tree was computed based on spearman’s rank correlation with ward linkage. (c) t-sne plot based on the hierarchical clustering analysis performed in panel b above. (d) epithelial cell clusters were interrogated for the expression of known basal, myoepithelial, ductal and acinar genes to determine their patterning amongst the cell clusters. c- cluster.']. Reference sentences:[]
Summary: Correlation patterns between cell clusters based on gene expression levels.

Text 271
10.1016/j.cub.2018.07.062
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 5. cell seek facilitates interactive exploration of the developing murine cerebellum (a) the main scatterhex plot allows panning and zooming of a two-dimensional view of a dataset, with cells pooled into hexbins. both gene expression summaries and subgroup information such as sample date and cell type can be visualized. (b) the correlation network of tfs that show nonrandom expression patterns in the t-sne plot can be explored using any selected group of cells. (c) selected cells can be ordered in pseudotime using monocle 2 to enable the separation of dyssynchronous expression programs. (d) tfs that show either branch- or pseudotime-specific expression can be displayed in a heatmap.']. Reference sentences:[to facilitate individualized exploration of the dataset across the neurobiology research community we have developed an interactive web-based interface called cell seek where similar types of analyses can be performed on any selected subset of the data (figure 5).a hexgrid approach for viewing the global t-sne plot was implemented to allow users to efficiently view summarizations of expression from a large number of cells in a small area that would otherwise be plotted on top of one another (figure 5a).as seen in figure 5a users can select a desired subgroup of cells either by lasso or by choosing cells from a specific sample date or cluster.once the desired cells are selected users can order the cells in pseudo- time using monocle 2 (figure 5c).users can create a heatmap of tfs that show nonrandom expression across pseudotime (figure 5d).finally users can form correlation networks of expressed tfs (figure 5b).]
Patterns of correlation between transcription factors in different cell subsets can be explored and visualized using Cell Seek.

Text 272
10.1101/gad.316802.118
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 3. cell type identification and correlation in a mouse model of pediatric mitochondrial cardiomyopathy. (a) tsne plot of 13 clusters of p10 knockout hearts. (b,c) violin plot (b) and feature plot (c) illustrating the expression patterns of selected marker genes of each cluster. (d) pairwise comparison of all clusters between p10 control and knockout hearts. (afb) activated fibroblasts; (fb) fibroblasts; (epi) epicardial cells; (bc) blood cells; (pc/smc) pericytes/smooth muscle cells.']. Reference sentences:[analysis of the 7323 nuclei from three p10 knockout hearts revealed 13 clusters (fig 3a) with largely comparable numbers of detected transcripts and genes for each cluster (supplemental fig s4a).as in control hearts each cluster contained a unique transcriptome including protein-coding and noncoding rna signatures (fig 3b c; supplemental fig s4bc; supplemental table s6).pathway analysis and marker genes revealed the identities of these clusters (fig 3a–c; supplemental table s6).pair- wise comparison of all control and knockout clusters showed that there was generally a one-to-one correlation of the same subtype of cardiac cells between control and knockout (fig 3d).detailed examination of the activated fibroblast transcriptional signature revealed b a d c figure 3.]
Patterns of correlation between cell types in control and knockout hearts, identified by marker genes and pairwise comparisons.

Text 273
10.1101/gad.316802.118
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 4. cell type-specific transcriptional remodeling of pediatric mitochondrial cardiomyopathy. (a) cell type compositions in p10 control and knockout hearts. (b) volcano plot showing differentially expressed genes in correlated clusters of control and knockout hearts. (c ) cellular pathways significantly changed in knockout versus control hearts between correlating clusters. (d) violin plot showing representative gene expression changes across different cell types. (e) sirius red stain of fibrosis in control and knockout hearts and quantification. n = 2 mice per genotype. bar, 100 µm. (∗) p < 0.05 by t-test. (fb) fibroblasts; (afb) activated fibroblasts; (epi) epicardial cells; (bc) blood cells; (pc/smc) pericytes/smooth muscle cells; (bcaa) branched chain amino acid.']. Reference sentences:[while knockout hearts retained most of the major and rare cell types except pcms and lecs their relative abun- dance exhibited cell type-specific changes (fig 4a).however each knockout cell type or subtype exhibited significant transcriptome-level changes (fig 4b).pathway enrichment analysis revealed that mitochondrial oxphos and tca cycle (e.g. cox7a1 ndufa1 sdha) fatty acid degradation/oxi- dation (e.g. acadm and hadh) extracellular matrix asso- ciated with fibrosis (e.g. post and fbn1) and ribosome genes (e.g. rplp1 and rps3) were among the most affected pathways in knockout hearts (fig 4cd).2015) most subtypes of dcms and mcms exhibited significantly decreased expression of mitochondrial oxphos genes (fig 4cd) reflecting the direct effects of loss of errα/γ in these cells.our snucdrop-seq results revealed that only mcms not dcms or other cell types showed a significant decrease in gene expression related to fatty acid oxidation bcaa catabolism and associated pyruvate metabolism (fig 4cd; li et al.indeed a significantly increased level of fibrosis was observed in knockout hearts at this age as revealed by sirius red staining (fig 4e).considering that knockout hearts contained similar percentages of total fibroblasts (fibroblasts and activated fibroblasts) (fig 4a) and lacked distinct populations of proliferating cells this suggests that the increased fibrosis in knockout hearts results from fibroblast activation rather than proliferation.grns associated with the transcriptional activation of gdf15 grn refers to a network of molecular regulators that functionally interact to modulate a gene expression pro- gram critical to specific cellular states and functions a c b e d figure 4.]
Summary: Cell type-specific transcriptome changes in knockout hearts, affecting pathways like mitochondrial function, fatty acid metabolism, and fibrosis, with altered gene expressions in different cell types.

Text 274
10.1016/j.cell.2018.08.067
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 5. comparing murine and human colonic mesenchymal cells (a) confusion matrices of human (left) and mouse (right) random forest models applied to independent datasets from the same species and different species show the proportion of real and modelpredicted cell cluster identities for healthy control (hc), human uc, or mouse dss. (b) human hc model features scored for cluster specificity in human (hs1, hs2, hs3) and mouse (ms1, ms2, ms3) data. the heatmap shows increasingly positive cluster markers in yellow (>0.5) and increasingly negative cluster markers in purple (<0.5), and non-specific genes in green ( = 0.5). the bar plot shows the correlation between mouse and human marker specificity for each cluster. (c) examples of features that drive the random forest results: mfap4, igfbp3, and sox6. (d) human and mouse cluster marker gene overlap correlation heatmap. (e) t-sne plot visualizing sub-cluster analysis of s2 cells from healthy mouse scrna-seq. two distinct cell clusters, not previously detected, show similarities to human s2a and s2b counterparts. (f) wnt5a expression by both s2a- and s2b-like mouse sub-clusters. (g) violin plots show example s2 markers identified from human data that do not exhibit a conserved expression patterns in mouse s2 subtypes.']. Reference sentences:[here we used random forest models to compare the transcriptional profiles of human and mouse cells (figure 5).(figure 5a).again this model accurately identified most s2 cells but it often classified the human s3 cluster as s1 (figure 5a).in agreement with the classification results we found that gene figure 5.specificity was most highly correlated between mouse and human s2 clusters while s1 clusters showed little correla- tion indicating less conserved gene expression patterns of this population (figure 5b).for instance healthy mouse s1 cells almost exclusively express igfbp3 whereas human s1 cells do not and instead show greatest igfbp3 expression in s2 and s3 cell populations (figure 5c).mfap4 is a negative marker for mouse s2 cluster but shows ubiquitous expression across all human stromal clusters (figure 5c).nonetheless some key marker genes showed good levels of conservation between mouse and human data such as the key s2 transcription factor sox6 (figure 5c).when we analyzed the degree of overlap between human uc and mouse dss cluster marker genes we found that the human s1 cluster bore similarities to mouse s3 and s4 clusters as well as bearing close similarity to human s3 and s4 subtypes while other cell types showed higher levels of cluster marker preservation (e.g. endothelial cells segregate with endothelial cells and all contractile types are together regardless of species) (figure 5d).we found higher expression of the membrane glycoprotein nrg1 in the 2b cell population in both human and mouse; however we found expression of wnt5a by both 2a-like and 2b-like populations in the mouse (figure 5f) while it was localized to a s2b sub-cluster in human (figure 1i).simi- larly a number of genes initially identified as s2 subtype-spe- cific in humans did not segregate with s2a or 2b-like subsets in mouse (e.g. apoe) or showed reversed cluster-specificity (e.g. lum) (figure 5g).]
Patterns of gene expression correlation between mouse and human single cells, with some markers showing conservation while others exhibit species-specific differences.

Text 275
10.1126/science.aaq0681
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 2. blastema formation from axolotl upper arm connective tissue cells involves molecular funneling during regeneration. (a) schematic of ct scrna-seq experiments performed on facs sorted mcherry+ ct cells of the uninjured axolotl upper arm (0 days post amputation, dpa) and during regeneration of the upper arm blastema at 3 dpa, 5 dpa, 8 dpa, 11 dpa and 18 dpa using prrx1:cre-er;caggs:lp-cherry animals (conversion at 1 cm size). (b) tsne projection of 2375 single cell transcriptomes visualizes cellular heterogeneity of the uninjured upper arm ct and reveals 8 clusters referring to 7 ct subtypes and one cluster of cycling cells (expression of ccnb1, inset). fct, fibroblastic ct. (c) violin plots showing distribution of expression for selected tsne cluster marker genes (b). colors refer to tsne clusters (b). (d) diffusion map projection (17) describes lineage relationships between uninjured ct cells, blastema-derived cells and cells from a regenerated upper arm. dc, diffusion component. (e) diffusion component (dc) 3 captures the cell type heterogeneity in the uninjured ct that is lost in the blastema. (f) expression of cell type marker genes (groups i to vi) identified for the uninjured ct is shown as heatmap for uninjured ct and blastema time point with genes in rows and cells hierarchically clustered in columns. transcript levels are scaled across rows. (g) mean pairwise correlation (pearson) between genes of each gene group (f) across all cells was calculated for each time point. mean correlation coefficients decrease over the course of blastema formation. error bars, standard deviation. (h) heatmap visualization of time point-specific marker genes (columns) with cells (rows) ordered by diffusion pseudotime (see also fig s4i). go enrichments (bottom) and exemplary genes (top) are shown (see also fig s5a). colored sidebar, time points. (i) pseudotemporal expression of different gene signatures across all cells from uninjured upper arm ct to blastema 18 dpa. smoothed conditional means using loess are presented.']. Reference sentences:[to specifically examine ct heterogeneity we analyzed 2375 single cell transcriptomes after facs isolation of labeled prrx1:cre-er;caggs:lp-cherry derived ct cells from the adult upper forelimb using tsne clustering (fig 2 a and b and table s5).we identified 8 distinct clusters that we assigned based on the expression of marker genes as tenocytes (tnmd) periskeletal cells (col8a2) actively cycling cells (ccnb1) as well as 5 fibroblastic ct subpopulations (fct i-v) (fig 2 b and c and table s6).time points were determined based on the average blas- tema cell cycle length (53-103 hours) (13 14) and previous bulk transcriptional dynamics (15) and therefore included the uninjured upper forelimbs (uninjured 108 cells) as well as blastema stages (3 dpa 108 cells; 5 dpa 167 cells; 8 dpa 121 cells; 11 dpa 163 cells; 18 dpa 135 cells) and a fully regen- erated upper forelimb (3-12 months post amputation 128 cells) (fig 2a fig s3 and table s7).we next combined fibroblastic and periskeletal cells from the uninjured ct which are the major populations contributing to the blastema (12) with all blas- tema states and the regenerated ct and used a diffusion pseudotime estimate (16 17) to reconstruct the lineage path from uninjured ct through the blastema state to the regen- erated ct (fig 2d and fig s4e).interestingly diffusion component 3 visualizes how heterogeneous differentiated ct cells funnel into the relatively homogeneous early blastema state (fig 2e) and regenerated ct cells funnel out of the blastema to re- establish the initial cellular heterogeneity (fig s4f).when focusing on the cell type-specific expression patterns found in the uninjured tissue (fig 2f) we did not observe a com- parable heterogeneity within the blastema cell populations and instead found that heterogeneity was diminished in all blastema time points (fig 2g) up until the re-differentiation of ct cell types (fig s4g).next we explored the transcriptional changes that ensue during the regenerative process within the blastema (fig 2h and fig s5 a to c).the uninjured ct state is characterized by the expression of many extracellular matrix (ecm) genes that are downregulated during blastema formation (fig 2 h and i).]
Summary: Correlation between gene groups decreases during blastema formation, leading to loss of heterogeneity in cell types.

Text 276
10.1126/science.aaq0681
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 3. connective tissue reprogramming progresses through a blastema-specific state prior to recapitulating embryonic limb bud development. (a) overview of scrna-seq experiments on three axolotl limb bud stages. 279 limb bud ct cells were in silico identified based on prrx1 expression and compared to blastema cells on the transcriptome level. (b) heatmap showing expression of genes (columns) that distinguish mature limb ct cells from limb bud ct cells (rows, hierarchically clusteres). expression of ct cell type marker genes is shown on the right. (c) bar graphs show fraction of cells per embryonic stage that express proximaldistal (meis2, hoxa11, hoxa13) or anterior-posterior (fgf8, shh) patterning genes. (d) intercellular correlation network of stage 44 limb bud cells (circles) based on expression of 5 known patterning genes places cells on a hypothetical position within an imaginary limb bud (see also fig s6c). (e) limb bud patterning genes are reactivated during blastema formation. bar graphs show fraction of cells per blastema time point that express proximal-distal (meis2, hoxa11, hoxa13) or anterior-posterior (fgf8, shh) patterning genes. (f) intercellular correlation network of 11 dpa blastema cells (circles) based on expression of 5 patterning genes places cells on a hypothetical position within an imaginary limb blastema. (see also fig s6d.) (g and h) boxplot shows distributions of scaled correlation between single cell transcriptomes at any given time point and the mock bulk transcriptome of stage 44 limb bud (g) or stage 28 limb field (h) ct cells. limb bud and limb field progenitors are most similar to 11 dpa blastema cells. (i) scatterplot showing differential correlation of single cell transcriptomes (dots, color represents time point) with limb bud versus mature ct transcriptomes (y axis) and with blastema 5 versus 11 dpa transcriptomes (x axis). (j) dotplot visualizing expression of genes shared between blastema 11 dpa and limb bud progenitor cells. circle size represents the fraction of cells of each time point expressing the gene and color represents the average expression level.']. Reference sentences:[to cover different stages of limb development we examined the single-cell transcrip- tomes of stage 28 limb field cells (82 cells) as well as stage 40 (76 cells) and stage 44 (121 cells) limb bud cells (21) (fig 3a and table s7) and identified ct cells based on prrx1 expres- sion (279 cells).we observed that ct precursors in the developing limb are distinct from and less differentiated than adult ct (fig 3b and fig s6a).variation in the expression of spa- tial patterning genes constituted the major source of hetero- geneity in the limb buds (stage 40 and 44; fig s6c) whereas patterning genes were generally not yet expressed in stage 28 limb field cells (fig 3c).this variation enabled reconstruc- tion of the proximal-distal and anterior-posterior axes through the correlated expression of patterning genes con- firming that our data captured the representation of the limb bud cells (fig 3d) (22).we investigated when patterning axes start to be established during limb regeneration and found that anterior-posterior markers (fgf8 and shh respectively) and proximal-distal markers (meis2 hoxa11 and hoxa13 re- spectively) are established between 8-11 dpa (fig 3e).in a similar manner as for the limb bud patterning genes enabled the spatial reconstruction of cell positions in a blastema 11 dpa (fig 3f and fig s6d).we found that the correlation of blastema cells with stage 40 and stage 44 limb bud peaks at 11 dpa with a pro- gressively weaker correlation in earlier blastema time points (fig 3g and fig s6 e and f).notably the same trend was observed when we compared blastema cells with the stage 28 limb field (fig 3h).additionally we find that cells in the 3 and 5 dpa blastema are similar to neither uninjured adult cells nor limb bud/ limb field cells suggesting that a cell state emerges in the blastema that is distinctive for limb regenera- tion (fig 3i and fig s6e).indeed within our dataset we identify many genes that are uniquely expressed in the early blastema stages whereas 11 dpa cells largely share expression patterns with the cells derived from the developing limb (fig 3j and fig s6 g and h).]
Patterns of correlation in gene expression between different cell types at various stages of limb development and regeneration.

Text 277
10.1038/s41467-018-06318-7
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 4d). this analysis revealed that gene expression patterns in four human hepatocyte clusters correlated significantly with zonated gene expression patterns identified in the mouse sinusoid (supplementary fig 8, supplementary data 3). two clusters']. Reference sentences:[]
Summary: Correlation between gene expression patterns in human hepatocyte clusters and zonated gene expression patterns in mouse sinusoid.

Text 278
10.1038/s41467-018-06639-7
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 3 hypertrophy-related modules and regulatory factors. a experimental scheme to identify hypertrophy-related modules and regulators. b principal component analysis (pca) plot of cardiomyocytes from mice at 1 week after tac in a. arrows denote the correlation coefficients of the respective module with each principal component. c correlation coefficient with cell area and proportion of variance for each principal component. d, e pca plots colored by the cell area (d) and by the expression of each module (e). f bar plot showing the correlation coefficient between cell area and module expression. modules are ordered by the correlation levels. g hub gene network of m1. the size of the dots represents node centrality. h bar plot showing the correlation coefficient between cell area and gene expression. genes whose expression was detected in at least one of the samples are ordered by correlation levels. i list of the most enriched go terms in the top 300 correlated genes with cell area. j representative genome browser views of h3k27ac chip-seq of cardiomyocytes from mice at 1 week after tac. the y-axis indicates reads per million (range, 0–3). k transcription factor recognition motifs most significantly enriched in the regulatory elements (res) for each module. l hierarchical clustering of transcription factor recognition motifs. the top 10 significantly enriched motifs for each module are selected. transcription factors strongly expressed in cardiomyocytes are shown below the heatmap']. Reference sentences:[differential expression analysis revealed that genes encoding proteins that function in the mitochondria ribosomes endoplasmic reticulum and cytoskeleton were highly expressed at 3 days and 1 week after tac operation (supplementary fig 3a).consistent with this result differential expression analysis revealed that atp2a2 an m3 hub gene was highly expressed in c6 and c7 whereas mrpl42 an m1 hub gene was not expressed specifically in c6 or c7 (supplementary fig 3b).to identify the gene modules involved in cardiomyocyte hypertrophy we again isolated car- diomyocytes from mice at 1 week after tac (early stage of car- diac hypertrophy) measured their area obtained their transcriptomes and integrated them (fig 3a and supplementary fig 11a–e).principal component analysis of their transcriptomes placed cardiomyocytes (fig 3b) and revealed that pc1 was positively correlated with cell area and m1 (mitochondrial ribo- some and oxidative phosphorylation) and negatively correlated with m3 (heart contraction) (fig 3b–e).correlation analysis between module expression and cell area showed that m1 and m5 (tricarboxylic acid cycle and fatty acid degradation) were strongly correlated with cardiomyocyte area (fig 3f).the expression of m1 hub genes (mrpl42 timm17a and cﬂ2; fig 3g) was also positively correlated with cardiomyocyte area (fig 3h and sup- plementary data 6).go analysis showed the significant enrich- ment of mitochondrial genes among the genes correlated with cell area (fig 3i and supplementary fig 11f).to uncover the regulatory mechanisms regulating cardiomyo- cyte hypertrophy we performed chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by sequencing (chip-seq) for histone h3 acetylated lysine 27 (h3k27ac) modification25 in cardiomyocytes from mice at 1 week after tac (fig 3a j).we divided h3k27ac-marked elements into putative regulatory elements for each module and evaluated the enrichment of transcription factor recognition motifs to infer the regulatory factors for each module (fig 3k).furthermore the clustering of motif enrichment for the top 10 enriched transcription factors of each module revealed specific combination patterns of transcription factors and their regulating modules (fig 3l and supplementary fig 12).to calculate the module expression data shown in fig 3 and 5 the “moduleeigengenes” function was applied to all cardiomyocytes including the 396 cardiomyocytes that had been used to obtain the co-expression network modules.for the integrative analysis of single-cell morphology and transcriptomes shown in fig 3 images of 48 cardiomyocytes from two mice at 1 week after tac were obtained using an inverted microscope with a digital camera (ckx31 and xz-2; olympus) soon after isolation by langendorff perfusion.]
Patterns related to correlation between module expression and cell area in cardiomyocytes during hypertrophy were identified, along with hub genes and regulatory factors.

Text 279
10.1038/s41592-018-0175-z
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 2 | clustering of osmfish counts and mapping of cell types. a,c, heatmap and t-sne plot visualization of the 31 identified clusters with distinct expression profiles. b, spatial organization of the cell types in the tissue section as shown by coloring each cell according to the cluster. d, heatmap showing the correlation of the expression signature of corresponding osmfish and scrna-seq clusters, with best matches outlined in red. e, expression-driven spatial map of the somatosensory cortex. f, mean nearest-neighbor distance between cells of all types. inhib., inhibitory neurons; cp, caudoputamen; ic, internal capsula; py, pyramidal neurons; opc, oligodendrocyte precursor cells; olig., oligodendrocytes; cop, committed oligodendrocyte precursors; nf, newly formed oligodendrocytes; mf, myelin-forming oligodendrocytes; pvm, perivascular macrophages; c. plexus, choroid plexus; epend., ependymal cells; peric., pericytes; vend, vascular endothelial cells; hipp., hippocampus; vsm, vascular smooth muscle cells.']. Reference sentences:[osmfish is characterized by a short hybridization time (2–4 h) high signal- to-noise ratio due to background reduction by tissue clearing and few false positives (supplementary fig 2b).it has an estimated dynamic range of 1–125 molecules per average cell (107 μ m2) in tissue (supplementary fig 2d) limited at the high end by optical crowding.after optimizing each step in the protocol we achieved losses of 5.3 ± 6.9% rna molecules per cycle (supplementary fig 2a) corresponding to ~40% loss over ten cycles.we observed astrocyte subtypes microglia choroid plexus epithelial cells ependymal cells pericytes perivascular macrophages vascular smooth muscle and endothelial cells as well as all cell types that form the oligodendro- cyte lineage (fig 2ac)1617.excitatory neurons followed the expected spatial positioning in the layered structure of the cortex confirming the robust- ness of our clustering approach (fig 2ac and supplementary fig 6a).because of limited coverage of our selected markers we found only five subtypes of interneurons characterized by the expression of one or multiple markers (fig 2a–c).using an iterative graph-based algorithm that we developed to find anatomical regions by deter- mining the spatially dominating cell types on a single section we show that osmfish can be used to automatically delineate tissue regions (fig 2e and supplementary fig 7).for example mea- suring the mean nearest-neighbor distance between cells of the same type showed high spatial self-affinity of ependymal cells and region-specific cell types and spatial self-avoidance of inhibitory neurons microglia and astrocytes (fig 2f diagonal).comparing instead cells of different types we found notably that endothelial cells (blood vessels) were located in close proximity (64.7 ± 9.5 µ m) to all other cell types (fig 2f).cell expression profiles in fig 2 were clustered with an iterative split algorithm using hierarchical clustering where the expression levels of the 33 genes of the resulting groups of cells were compared using a two-sided mann-whitney u-test and p < 0.1 × 10−20 was used to define enriched genes in one of the groups.]
Patterns related to correlation between osmFISH and scRNA-seq clusters, with best matches outlined in red, and spatial organization of cell types in tissue.

Text 280
10.1016/j.celrep.2018.09.006
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 4. distinctive epidermal cell subpopulations in human scalp corresponding to follicular and interfollicular keratinocytes the t-sne map shows spectral clustering of scalp keratinocytes into 15 groups (table s4), which reveal correlates of outer and inner bulge cells, sebaceous gland cells, upper follicular epithelium, and also recapitulation of multi-site interfollicular epithelium strata. these cell clusters could not be confidently assigned locations and are not depicted in the follicle diagram. see also figure s2 and data s1.']. Reference sentences:[at 15 clusters putative subpopulations in human hair follicles resolved further without duplicating subcategories (figure 4; table s4).despite a degree of arbitrariness in clustering this number of groups is within range of the 15 identified in our high-resolution analysis of human scalp (figure 4; table s4).]
Patterns of correlation between distinct subpopulations of scalp keratinocytes, including outer and inner bulge cells, sebaceous gland cells, and upper follicular epithelium, were identified through spectral clustering.

Text 281
10.1038/s41586-018-0694-x
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 2 | properties of cd4+ t cell clonal expansion, migration and developmental transition. a, clonal expansion levels of cd4+ t cell clusters quantified by startrac-expa indices for each patient (n = 11). b, similarities of the signature gene expressions of t cell clusters. distance = (1 − pearson correlation coefficient)/2. c, migration potentials of cd4+ t cell clusters quantified by overall startrac-migr indices for each patient (n = 11). d, developmental transition of cd4+ temra cells with other cd4+ cells quantified by pstartrac-tran indices for each patient (n = 10). p < 0.001, kruskal–wallis test. e, normalized']. Reference sentences:[genomic alterations of these tumours were consistent with the characteristics of crc from the cancer genome atlas (tcga)12 (extended data fig 2b supplementary table 2).among all cd4+ clusters cd4_c03-gnly exhibited the highest clonal expansion (fig 2a).this cluster contained signature genes that include nkg7 prf1 gnly and gzmh—a signature that is profoundly similar to that of cd8+ temra cells (fig 2b extended data fig 9a); cd4_c03-gnly cells were therefore designated as cd4+ temra cells.notably the cd4_c03-gnly cluster showed migration properties that were comparably high to those of cd8+ temra cells (fig 2c) and it was linked to the cd4+ tem population (fig 2d).tumour-infiltrating treg cells were among the highly expanded popu- lations (fig 2a).itreg cells that share tcrs with th17 cells fell into a sub-cluster of a tumour treg cell group with higher expression of rorc1120 (fig 2e f).in addition satb121 was selectively expressed in treg cells linked to th17 cells whereas bach222 was preferentially expressed in treg cells linked to cxcl13+bhlhe40+ th1-like cells (fig 2e supplementary table 8).by contrast those treg cells with high intra-cluster expansion had rel- atively high expression of tnfrsf9 and tigit (fig 2e) suggesting that at least some of these cells might belong to natural treg cells23.letter research extended data fig 2 | pathological and genomic characteristics of crc tumours in the study.]
Patterns of correlation in signature gene expressions among CD4+ T cell clusters, indicating similarities in clonal expansion, migration, and developmental transitions.

Text 282
10.1038/s41590-018-0230-z
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 7 | cd161+ treg cells accelerate wound healing and are associated with lower inflammation in ibd. a, enrichment of treg cell subpopulations in colons relative to blood of healthy subjects and patients with cd (n=3 paired samples per group). b,c, wound-healing assay showing growth of caco-2 cells cultured with medium alone or medium supplemented with culture supernatants (snt) of activated memory or cd161+ treg cells; representative images captured over time (0, 72, 96 and 120h; scale bars, 0.5mm) (b) and percentage of open wound over time from n=3 experiments (c). d, open wound fraction at culture end for caco-2 cells in the presence of culture supernatants from activated cd161+ treg cells with blocking antibodies to stated cytokines or isotype-matched control antibody (cumulative data from n=3 experiments). e, concentration (pgml−1) of stated cytokines in supernatants of cd161+ treg cells transduced, or not, with lentivirus encoding bach2 or control virus (cumulative data from n=6 experiments). f, correlation matrix of indicated transcripts in bowel specimens of active cd (n=171). g, violin plots showing distribution of cxcl1 (left) and klrb1 (right) expression in inflamed (n=157) and uninflamed cd or non-ibd tissue biopsies (n=56). h, roc curves showing performance of cxcl1, il7r, klrb1 and klrb1/il7r ratio to discriminate inflamed tissue (n=157) versus uninflamed cd or non-ibd tissue (n=56). auc analyses and their p values indicated. i,j, klrb1/il7r ratio in transcriptomes of inflamed and uninflamed sites of cd (i) and auc+95% confidence interval (ci) of klrb1/il7r roc curves to distinguish the two (j) from two additional, independent, datasets. numbers of biologically independent samples (n) in i is indicated. median, upper and lower quantile, range and outliers are presented in i. in j, areas of circles indicate sample size. source data for f–h: gse57945; i,j: gse20881 and ref. 75. bars show mean+s.e.m. throughout; p<0.05, p<0.01, p<0.001 and p<0.0001 by one-way (d,e) and two-way anova (a,c), t-test (g,i) and auc analysis (h,j).']. Reference sentences:[open chromatin regions (ocrs) sur- rounding the signature tregcell–associated genes notably foxp3 ctla4 and il2ra were not significantly different among the three populations (supplementary fig 7a).the genomic distributions of ocrs were similar in the three clusters with the majority within intronic and intergenic regions (supplementary fig 7b).to determine potential transcription factors targeting distinct treg cell regulomes we searched for enrichment of known motifs above background within ocr clusters using homer software (fig 6c and supplementary fig 7c).cd161+-specific ocrs were enriched for motifs of rorγ t runx ap-1 family (for exam- ple batf fosl2) and cap‘n’collar family members that include bach2 (fig 6c and supplementary fig 7c).expression of bach2 itself was significantly reduced and that of rorc was significantly elevated in freshly isolated cd161+ treg cells compared with that of other treg cell populations (supplementary fig 7d) suggesting that altered expression of these transcription factors could explain some of the transcriptional differences seen in their targets.an integrated network was con- structed based on these effects to illustrate the transcriptional cir- cuitry (supplementary fig 7e).by contrast there was a significant enrichment of cd161+ treg cells in healthy colons which was even more pronounced in patients with cd (fig 7a).supernatants from activated cd161+ treg cells increased and accelerated closure of the wound by almost twofold compared with supernatants from memory treg cells or medium alone (fig 7bc supplementary fig 8c and supplementary videos 1–3).neutralization of il-17 alone il17 together with il-22 il-4 or il-10 impeded the wound-healing capacity of supernatants of activated cd161+ treg cells implicating these cytokines as mediators of wound healing (fig 7d).over-expression of bach2 by lentivi- ral delivery in cd161+ treg cells significantly inhibited the produc- tion of il-17 and il-4 with a similar but not significant trend for il-22 and il-10 (fig 7e and supplementary fig 8d) supporting the notion that the wound-healing program of cd161+ treg cells is dependent on reduced expression of the repressive bach2 tran- scription factor in these cells.klrb1 correlated negatively with 15 genes previously shown to be upregulated in inflamed cd mucosa relative to its expression in uninflamed cd mucosa43 (fig 7f).of these cxcl1 a clinical bio- marker of cd was significantly more highly expressed in inflamed cd mucosa than in uninflamed cd mucosa while klrb1 expres- sion was significantly higher in uninflamed cd mucosa (fig 7g).g venn diagram showing shared and unique degs regulated by tfs (see also supplementary fig 7e) (left) and corresponding function for those degs (right).in all cases the klrb1/il7r predictor was higher in uninflamed cd mucosa (fig 7i) and distinguished inflamed mucosa from uninflamed mucosa (auc range 0.63 to 0.79; fig 7j) suggesting that tissue infiltration with cd161+ treg cells is associated with lower inflammation in cd.]
Patterns related to correlation between klrb1 and il7r expressions in different cell states, distinguishing inflamed from uninflamed tissues in single-cell transcriptomics.

Text 283
10.1016/j.ydbio.2018.09.023
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['[\'fig 4. comparison of gene expression profiling of coronet cells by scrnaseq\', \'and bulk rnaseq a) expression of coronet cell marker tyrosine hydroxylase (th)\', \'mapped onto cluster e cells on tsne plot. b) magnified view of brain of ciona larva\', \'electroporated with fascin > h2b:mcherry (pink nuclei) and th > unc-76::egfp\', \'(green), revealing coronet cells of the ventral brain/proto-hypothalamo-retinal region.\', \'c) comparison of diﬀerential gene expression analyses based on bulk rnaseq (enriched/\', \'depleted in sorted th+ cells relative to whole brain; see supplemental table 4) and\', \'scrnaseq (enriched/depleted in cluster e, supplemental table 2, sheet 5), indicating a\', "strong correlation (pearson\'s correlation coeﬃcient, r = 0.749) between the two methods.", \'only genes that were diﬀerentially expressed in cluster e were analyzed (n = 942 total\', \'genes. see supplemental table 5). “gap” in scrnaseq values is due to a default average\', \'log(fc) cutoﬀ of ± 0.25. for perspective, little correlation was found when comparing\', \'values for genes diﬀerentially expressed in other neurons, like cluster b (r = -0.327) or\']. Reference sentences:[this cluster includes a group of distinctive cells called the coronet cells (dilly 1969) which are immunoreactive for dopamine and express tyrosine hydroxylase which encodes the rate-limiting enzyme for catecholamine synthesis (fig 4ab) (moret et al. 2005).developmental biology xxx (xxxx) xxx–xxx 3 rnaseq analyses (fig 4b supplemental table 5) suggesting that cluster e is highly specific for coronet cells and perhaps other closely related cell types of the ventral brain.here their putative photoreceptor identity is suggested by conspicuous expression of visual cycle genes bco opsin1/2.a and opsin4/rgr fig 4.first we used heat maps and pairwise comparison of pcs to determine sources of variation (supplemental fig 4 supplemental fig 5).]
Summary: Correlation between bulk and single-cell RNA-seq methods for gene expression in coronet cells, showing strong agreement (r = 0.749).

Text 284
10.1016/j.cell.2018.09.006
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 3. the resistance program is a coherently regulated module that represses cell-cell interactions (a) distribution of program oe scores in cutaneous (pink) versus uveal (blue) melanoma from tcga after filtering microenvironment contributions (star methods). (b) right: number of genes in each part of the program that mediate physical interactions with other cell types (color) and the significance of the corresponding enrichment. dashed line: statistical significance. (c and d) co-regulation of the program. (c) oe of the induced and repressed parts of the immune resistance programs in malignant cells (left, scrna-seq data) and cutaneous melanoma tumors (right, tcga rna-seq data after filtering microenvironment signals). pearson correlation coefficient (r) and p value are marked. (d) pearson correlation coefficients (color bar) between the program’s genes across malignant cells from the same tumor (left, average coefficient) or across cutaneous melanoma from tcga (right, after filtering microenvironment effects). see also figure s3.']. Reference sentences:[first compared to cuta- neous melanoma (where we initially identified it) the program 986 cell 175 984–997 november 1 2018 is more pronounced in uveal melanoma (figure 3a) which re- sides in an immune-privileged environment and has very low response rates to immunotherapy (algazi et al. 2016).cell 175 984–997 november 1 2018 987 resistant malignant cells and other cell types in the tumor microenvironment including mhc i:tcr (t cells) cd58:cd2 (t cells) and il1rap:il1b (macrophages) (figure 3b and star methods) as well as the senescence-associated secretory phenotype (sasp) (p = 4.3 3 10=166 and 3.6 3 10=3 one-sided t test and mixed effects respectively; figure 2d) which has been shown to enhance t cell responses (gordy et al. 2016).we stained histological a b c d figure 3.co-variation of the immune resistance program genes across single cells within each tumor related to figure 3 gene-gene pearson correlation coefficients (color bar) between the genes in the resistance program across individual malignant cells from each specific tumor (as labeled).genes are sorted in the same order in all heatmaps (and in figure 3d).]
Summary: Co-regulation patterns of immune resistance program genes across malignant cells and tumors, shown by gene-gene correlation coefficients.

Text 285
10.1016/j.cell.2018.09.006
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure s3. co-variation of the immune resistance program genes across single cells within each tumor, related to figure 3 gene-gene pearson correlation coefficients (color bar) between the genes in the resistance program, across individual malignant cells from each specific tumor (as labeled). genes are sorted in the same order in all heatmaps (and in figure 3d). the consistent intra-tumor correlation suggests shared regulation.']. Reference sentences:[]
Summary: Correlation of immune resistance program genes within single cells in tumors, indicating shared regulation.

Text 286
10.1016/j.cell.2018.10.038
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure s7. correlation of t cell markers in external bulk rna-seq data, related to star methods (a and e) pairwise spearman correlation between different immune markers in the van allen (a) and riaz (e) cohorts. (b and f) spearman correlation between the expression levels of the different immune markers shown in the table and cd3 in the van allen (b) and riaz (f) cohorts. (c and g) scatterplot showing the correlation between the good signatures based on cd8_g marker genes and cd3 expression levels in the van allen (c) and riaz (g) cohorts. (d and h) scatterplot showing the correlation between the bad signatures based on cd8_b marker genes and cd3 expression levels in the van allen (d) and riaz (h) cohorts.']. Reference sentences:[]
Summary: Correlation patterns between immune markers and CD3 expression levels in different cohorts.

Text 287
10.1016/j.celrep.2018.10.047
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 4. assessing cell-cell interactions occurring in human metastatic melanoma (a) cell-cell interactions involving tregs in human metastatic melanoma averaged across 19 tumor samples. the cell type labels are written as (cell type expressing the ligand) à (cell type expressing the receptor). black dots indicate interactions that are significantly present across all tumors (one-sided wilcoxon rank-sum test and benjamini hochberg fdr < 0.05). only interactions with a score greater than 0.5 across any cell type pair are displayed. (b) examination of tumor-specific interactions in the b7 family between cd8+ t cells and tregs shows that interactions that occur on average in (a) do not occur in all individual patients. (c) example interactions between macrophages and cd8 cells where the receptor and ligand components of an interaction do not individually correlate with treg percentage but the interaction score is strongly correlated with phenotype. (d) distribution of spearman correlation coefficients between treg percentage and randomized ligand-receptor interactions from (c). red lines indicate the spearman correlation of the actual ligand-receptor pair. the p values indicate the probability that a randomized interaction pair has a stronger correlation than the actual interaction pair. see also figure s4.']. Reference sentences:[given the complex interactions be- tween t cells in the tumor microenviron- ment and their importance in mounting a successful immunotherapy response we investigated interactions involving tregs (figure 4a).because of the known immunosuppressive role of tregs we also examined individual tumors for b7 family interactions where tregs expressed the ligand and cd8+ t cells expressed the receptor (figure 4b).however although these b7 interactions occurred on average across cell reports 25 1458–1468 november 6 2018 1463 a b c d figure 4.despite the general correlation between interaction score correlation and receptor and/or ligand correlation we again observed cases where neither the receptor nor the ligand was strongly corre- lated with phenotype but the interaction score was strongly correlated (figure 4c).we assessed the significance of interactions identified in figure 4c by using randomized interactions with one member of the ligand-recep- tor interaction being the same and randomizing the other mem- ber of the interaction (i.e. using the same ligand but calculating the interaction score with a random receptor and vice versa).for both interactions identified in figure 4c random interaction pairs did not correlate as strongly as the real inter- action.]
Summary: Correlation patterns between cell-cell interactions and phenotype, despite weak individual gene correlations.

Text 288
10.1016/j.stem.2018.10.010
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 2. comparison of kidney cell types and differentiation state in ipsc-derived kidney organoids generated with both protocols (a and b) heatmap of all cells clustered by recursive hierarchical clustering and louvain-jaccard clustering (seurat), showing selected marker genes for every population of the morizane protocol (a) and takasato protocol (b). the bottom bars indicate the batch of origin (batch) and number of unique molecular identifier (umi) detected per cell (depth). (c and d) tsne plot of cells based on the expression of highly variable genes for the day 26 organoids from the morizane protocol (c) and takasato protocol (d). the detected clusters are indicated by different colors. (e) heatmap indicating pearson’s correlations on the averaged profiles among common cell types for morizane and takasato organoids. (f) dendrogram showing relationships among the cell types in morizane (left) and takasato (right) organoids. the dendrogram was computed using hierarchical clustering with average linkage on the normalized expression value of the highly variable genes. (g–m) qpcr comparing cell marker expression for podocytes (nphs1) (g), proximal tubule (pt) (slc3a1) (h), loop of henle (loh) (slc12a1) (i), neurons (crabp1 and map2) (j and k), and muscle (mylpf and myog) (l and m) between organoid protocols. p < 0.001 and p < 0.0001. error bars indicate ± sem of fold change. (n and o) immunoﬂuorescence analysis of neural marker crabp1 expression (green) in the morizane (n) and takasato (o) protocols. cells were co-stained with pt (ltl, white) and podocyte (nphs1, red) markers. scale bars, 50 mm.']. Reference sentences:[despite this variability both protocols generated very similar cell types because each pair of cell types was highly correlated (figure 2e).additionally dendrograms of analogous cell types from both cell types revealed very similar cell relationships (figure 2f).]
Patterns of correlation between cell types and relationships among them were similar in both protocols.

Text 289
10.1016/j.molcel.2018.10.020
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 5. transcriptome analysis sensitivity and noise level at different sequencing depths by subsampling analysis (a and b) median numbers of umis (a) and genes (b) detected for each sample with increasing effective read counts. (c) transcriptome analysis noise level saturates quickly with sequencing depth. the noise was measured as the nearest correlation (see star methods). see also figure s6.']. Reference sentences:[we investigated how the precision level was affected by the sequencing depth and found that the precision index rapidly saturated with increasing read depth (r20000 effective reads) for all three systems (figure 5c).this indicates the validity of combining different data- a b c figure 5.]
Summary: The correlation between gene expressions saturates quickly with sequencing depth, affecting precision levels in single-cell transcriptomics.

Text 290
10.1038/s41467-018-07582-3
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 5 caf gene profiles correlate in human bulk rna-sequencing data. pearson correlation of genes from vcaf and mcaf profiles in tcga datasets of a breast cancer, b pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma, c lung adenocarcinoma, and d renal clear cell carcinoma. correlation of the vcaf profile to e an endothelial metagene and f a matrix metagene. correlation of the mcaf profile to g an endothelial metagene and h a matrix metagene in tcga breast cancer data. i correlation of vcaf and mcaf profiles to functional metagenes in the nested case–control study dataset of breast cancer patients. j quantification of transwell invasion assay. the average percentage of area covered by invaded cells on the bottom of the membrane was quantified from 4 representative images in n = 3 biological repeats; data depicted as mean ± s.d. p = 0.026, p = 0.0045; two-sided, unpaired students t-test']. Reference sentences:[we next used rna-ish in order to detect dcaf-specific transcripts in tumor tissue with a variety of markers (supple- mentary figure 5ab).the mia transcript was mainly detected at low levels in the tumor epithelium with a few sparse hotspots of increased expression (supplementary figure 5a).the spint2 transcript was homogenously expressed in the tumor epithelium but not in the stroma as identified by the mcaf-specific transcript mfap5 (supplementary figure 5b).immunostaining of human tissues confirmed mia expression in the tumor epithelium with few discrete mia-positive cafs within stromal streaks (supplementary figure 5c and 4f).to confirm that the detected caf subpopulations were distinct using more markers we used rna-ish of vcaf and mcaf marker transcripts and observed no overlap in the expression of several pairs of markers (supplementary figure 5d-e).in contrast the expected partial overlap was detected between the expression of the mcaf marker svep1 and the commonly used but promiscuous caf marker acta2 (supplementary figure 5f).finally we confirmed the mutual-exclusivity of mcaf and vcaf marker genes fibulin-1 and nidogen-2 in human tissue sections by immunostaining (supplementary figure 5g).in addition the gene profiles were also highly and specifically correlated within bulk rna-seq data from other cancers such as pancreatic adenocarcinoma lung cancer and renal cell cancer suggestive of a certain extent of commonality in the development of cafs within distinct malignant diseases (fig 5b–d).in keeping with the data from mouse tumors the vcaf signature was highly correlated to an endothelial cell metagene in breast tumors whereas the mcaf signature was strongly associated with an ecm metagene27 (fig 5e–h).the gene signature for vcafs correlated strongly to an endothelial metagene27 and a microvasculature signature29 within the dataset from the case–control study whereas mcafs instead were highly associated with a stroma- derived invasion signature30 and a stroma-related treatment- predictive signature31 (fig 5i).in support of our previous findings in human tumors both vcafs and mcafs significantly augmented the number of cancer cells that invaded through the matrix into the lower chamber compared to cell culture medium alone (fig 5j).]
Patterns related to correlation between gene profiles in different cancer types and their association with specific metagenes and invasion signatures in single-cell transcriptomics data.

Text 291
10.1126/science.aat7615
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 2. global transcriptomic architecture of the developing human brain. (a) mrna-seq dataset includes 11 neocortical areas (ncx) and five additional regions of the brain. ipc, posterior inferior parietal cortex; a1c, primary auditory (a1) cortex; stc, superior temporal cortex; itc, inferior temporal cortex; v1c, primary visual (v1) cortex. (b) the first two multidimensional scaling components from gene expression showed samples from late fetal ages and early infancy (w5, gray) clustered between samples from exclusively prenatal windows (w1 to w4, blue) and exclusively postnatal windows (w6 to w9, red). (c) intraregional pearson’s correlation analysis found that samples within exclusively prenatal (w1 to w4) or postnatal (w6 to w9) windows correlated within, but not across, those ages. (d) interregional transcriptomic differences revealed a']. Reference sentences:[to gain a broad understanding of this tran- scriptomic variation we analyzed the level of similarity between individual samples in the mrna-seq dataset using multidimensional scal- ing applied to both gene and isoform transcript- level analyses (fig 2b and fig s11 and s12).the transcriptomes of major brain regions and neocortical areas correlated well across both embryonic and early to mid- fetal (w1 to w4) and later postnatal (w6 to w9) development but displayed a sharp decrease in correlation across late fetal development and early infancy (w5) (fig 2c and fig s14).taken together our observation of high variation during embryonic and early to mid-fetal ages followed by a decrease across late fetal ages and the subsequent resumption of higher levels of inter- and intraregional variation during late childhood and adolescence revealed a cup-shaped or hourglass-like pattern of transcriptomic devel- opment (fig 2d).within any given de- velopmental window ac-pca exhibited a clear separation of brain regions but the average dis- similarity between transcription profiles of brain regions declined from w1 to w5 and then in- creased with age after w5 (fig 2 e and f and fig s16).because of the relative transcriptomic uniqueness of the cbc its exclusion unmasked a qualitatively distinct and pronounced cup-shaped pattern with a transition beginning before birth and spanning the late fetal period and early infancy (fig 2f).in addition re- flecting the spatial and functional topography of li et al. science 362 eaat7615 (2018) 14 december 2018 3 of 13 pearson correlation 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0 cbc ncx b c −100 −50 0 50 100 −100 −50 0 50 100 mds 2 a dfc vfc m1c s1c ipc a1c stc itc cbc mfc v1c amy hip str md ofc brain regions neocortex (ncx) m1c a1c stc itc v1c amy str md cbc hip ofc dfc mfc vfc cerebrum thalamus cerebellum frontal lobe s1c ipc parietal lobe temporal lobe occipital lobe prefrontal cortex (pfc) mds 1 prenatal samples postnatal samples w1−4 w5 w6−9 intra-regional differences prenatal brain d w1 w2 w3 w4 w5 w6 w7 w8 w9 w1 w2 w3 w4 w5 w6 w7 w8 w9 inter-regional differences postnatal brain dfc ofc itc m1c s1c ipc a1c stc cbc mfc v1c md hip amy str c s vfc ncx hip amy str md cbc 50 100 200 500 2000 10000 mean difference post-conception days (log2 scale) birth 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.3 0.2 −1e+4 -5e+3 0 5e+3 −1e+4 0 1e+4 −1e+4 0 1e+4 −1e+4 0 1e+4 pc2 (14.9 %) cerebrum cerebrum cerebrum late midfetal (w4: 19 - 22 pcw) late fetal-infancy (w5: 35 pcw - 0.3 py) early adulthood (w9: 21 - 40 py) all regions one region removed 3e+3 6e+3 9e+3 12e+3 15e+3 mean distance f e pc2 (7.9%) pc2 (12.3%) pc1 (23.4 %) pc1 (16.2 %) pc1 (31.7 %) w1 w2 w3 w4 w5 w6 w7 w8 w9 w1 w2 w3 w4 w6 w7 w8 w9 prenatal postnatal prenatal postnatal w5 all ncx hip amy str md cbc removed ncx hip amy str md cbc fig 2.]
Patterns related to correlation in gene expression across different developmental stages and brain regions.

Text 292
10.1126/science.aat8077
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 5. shared and divergent transcriptomic features of homologous cell types between humans and macaques. (a) dendrogram and heat map showing diversity and correlation of prenatal cell types within and between the two species. the human single cells were from (33). (b) dendrogram and heat map showing diversity and correlation of adult cell types within and between the two species. (c) cell type specificity of interspecies differentially expressed genes based on the single cell/nucleus information. blue, human down-regulated genes; red, human up-regulated genes.']. Reference sentences:[this enrichment was especially strong for non–untranslated region (utr) exonic ele- ments belonging to non–protein-coding tran- scripts from protein-coding genes and 5′ utr regions (p < 2.2 × 10−16) but was also significant zhu et al. science 362 eaat8077 (2018) 14 december 2018 8 of 15 adult cell types b a embryonic and fetal cell types prenatal trim54 prss55 vwc2l ephx3 eme1 ufsp1 rnf128 procr arhgef37 ccl24 slamf9 tbc1d8b trpv2 olfml2b p2rx2 rfx8 ticam1 ccdc158 cartpt atp4a tbx15 sh2d1b smpdl3b trpm8 crabp1 dkk1 slc17a8 kcnj1 lmod1 lix1 ppp1r17 lpin3 capg abhd1 sytl4 ush1c cyb5r2 ip6k3 dmrt2 clca4 gpr62 sgk2 nhlh2 timp4 lcn9 apol1 st6galnac1 gimap4 lgals3 slc52a3 pomc smoc2 matn3 tmem204 mnda microglia opc astro inn exn endo oligo opc astro inn8 inn7 inn6b inn6a inn4b inn4a inn3 inn1c inn1b exn6b exn6a exn5b exn4 exn2b exn2a exn1 inter-species differential expression human down human up c adult vsmc microglia oligo astro3 astro1 astro2 astro4 opc2 opc1 unassigned inn1b inn3 inn1c inn4b inn4a inn1a inn6a inn6b inn7 inn8 exn2b exn6a exn8 exn6b exn1 exn2a exn4 exn3e exn5b endo pericyte astro2 astro1 oligo opc exn5 exn9 exn7 exn10 exn1 exn8 exn6 exn3 exn4 exn2 inn3 inn4 inn5 inn2 inn1 human −0.5 0.5 endo macaque pericyte endo microglia inn1 inn2 exn1 exn3 exn2 astro opc2 oligo opc1 blood exn2 exn3 inn3 exn1 inn1 inn2 microglia2 microglia1 endo pericyte opc3 oligo opc1 opc2 astro1 astro4 astro3 astro2 −0.4 0 0.4 enep/rgc1 eipc1 enasn1 enep/rgc2 enep/rgc3 enep/rgc4 enasn2 enasn3 enasn4 enasn5 eipc2 enasn6 human fig 5.the correlation between human and macaque cell types showed that all human cell types had a close homolog in macaques and vice versa (fig 5 a and b).nonetheless we identified genes show- ing interspecies differential expression in homol- ogous cell types (fig 5c).we identified 14 differentially expressed genes in prenatal development and 41 differentially ex- pressed genes in adulthood (fig 5c).for example trim54 which encodes a protein implicated in axonal growth (62) was down-regulated in hu- man prenatal neocortical excitatory neurons (fig 5c).overall we found that hu- man dfc cell types showed high correlation with macaque dfc cell types and that only a small set of genes displayed differential expression between these homologous cell types (fig 5c).]
Patterns of correlation between homologous cell types in humans and macaques, with few differentially expressed genes identified.

Text 293
10.1164/rccm.201712-2410OC
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 1. integrated single-cell rna-seq analysis of patients with pulmonary fibrosis identifies diverse lung cell populations. single-cell rna-seq was performed on single-cell suspensions generated from eight lung biopsies from transplant donors and eight lung explants from transplant recipients with pulmonary fibrosis. all 16 samples were analyzed using canonical correlation analysis within the seurat r package. cells were clustered using a graph-based shared nearest neighbor clustering approach and visualized using a tdistributed stochastic neighbor embedding (tsne) plot. (a) cellular populations identified. (b) cells on the tsne plot of all 16 samples were colored as originating either from a donor or from a patient with pulmonary fibrosis. (c) each population included cells from donors and patients with pulmonary fibrosis. (d) canonical cell markers were used to label clusters by cell identity as represented in the tsne plot. cell types were classified as epithelial, immune, or mesenchymal as indicated in the legend.']. Reference sentences:[in the human lung we identified alveolar type ii cells; alveolar type i cells; ciliated club and basal airway epithelial cells; alveolar macrophages; dendritic cells; t and nkt cells; plasma cells and b cells; fibroblasts; and endothelial and lymphatic cells (figure 1a supplementary table 1).each cluster included cells from donors and patients with pulmonary fibrosis (figure 1b).the patient was subsequently diagnosed with ipf based on histopathological examination of the biopsy (figure 10ab).we identified 1516 cells corresponding to 13 different cell populations (figure 10c).among the detected cells we were able to resolve several populations of endothelial cells (characterized by expression of vwf) including a distinct population of cells characterized by expression of prox1 mmrn1 tbx1 and reln suggesting that these cells represent lymphatic progenitors which were underrepresented in samples obtained at the time of transplant (figure 10d only prox1 shown supplementary table s5).published on 15-december-2018 as 10.1164/rccm.201712-2410oc copyright © 2018 by the american thoracic society 27 figure legends figure 1.figure 10.published on 15-december-2018 as 10.1164/rccm.201712-2410oc copyright © 2018 by the american thoracic society figure 1.published on 15-december-2018 as 10.1164/rccm.201712-2410oc copyright © 2018 by the american thoracic society figure 10.published on 15-december-2018 as 10.1164/rccm.201712-2410oc copyright © 2018 by the american thoracic society supplementary figures supplementary figure s1 (refers to figure 1).supplementary figure s2 (refers to figure 1).(a) heatmap showing the top five positive marker genes within each cluster from the combined analysis of eight normal and eight fibrotic human lungs in figure 1a.supplementary figure s3 (refers to figure 1).supplementary figure s11 (refers to figure 10).refers to figure 1.published on 15-december-2018 as 10.1164/rccm.201712-2410oc copyright © 2018 by the american thoracic society supplementary figure s1 (refers to figure 1).published on 15-december-2018 as 10.1164/rccm.201712-2410oc copyright © 2018 by the american thoracic society supplementary figure s2 (refers to figure 1).(a) heatmap showing the top five positive marker genes within each cluster from the combined analysis of eight normal and eight fibrotic human lungs in figure 1a.published on 15-december-2018 as 10.1164/rccm.201712-2410oc copyright © 2018 by the american thoracic society supplementary figure s3 (refers to figure 1).published on 15-december-2018 as 10.1164/rccm.201712-2410oc copyright © 2018 by the american thoracic society supplementary figure s11 (refers to figure 10).]
Patterns related to correlation between cell populations in normal and fibrotic lungs were identified using single-cell RNA-seq.

Text 294
10.1038/s41467-018-07581-4
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 2 splenic il-10-producing cd4+ t cells contain a regulatory cluster. a spearman correlation coefficient between each cluster from small intestine and spleen. b fold change analysis of genes enriched in indicated clusters compared to other clusters that were amongst the 100 most enriched genes. c expression of indicated genes encoding cytokines and chemokines. d expression of indicated genes encoding transcription factors. e expression of indicated genes encoding other factors. f expression of indicated genes encoding surface receptors']. Reference sentences:[interestingly sp c5 was defined by high expression of ikzf2 (encoding helios) as well as il2ra ctla4 and icos which are central hallmarks of foxp3+ treg cells31–35 while these genes were lower in sp c4 (supplementary figure 2).to this end we calculated the spearman correlation coefficient between each cluster from small intestine and spleen (fig 2a).fold change analysis of genes highly enriched in those clusters revealed that 35 out of 100 top enriched genes were shared by both clusters (fig 2b).id2 was also very highly expressed by both clusters and has already been linked to the maintenance of regulatory t cells3738 (fig 2b d).concurrent with the high expression of gzmb both si c1 and sp c1 were defined by high expression of serpinb6b and serpinb9 (fig 2b e).also lilrb4 has been linked with regulatory functions in t cells and other immune cell subsets even though much less understood43–45 and was more highly expressed in sp c1 and si c1 compared to other clusters (fig 2b e).finally we found that both sp c1 and si c1 were characterized by high expression of lag3 ccr5 ctla4 il12rb2 and tnfrsf18 (fig 1f fig 2b f).for instance lag3 and ccr5 were highly expressed in both sp c1 and si c1 (fig 2b f).additionally havcr2 (encoding tim-3) was highly expressed by cells in sp c1 (fig 1f; supplementary figure 2).in addition id2 a factor that we found to be highly expressed in both sp c1 and si c1 in the single cell sequencing data set (fig 2b d) was also amongst the transcription factors highly expressed in cir rich cells (fig 5c).]
Summary: Correlation between clusters in small intestine and spleen, with shared gene enrichment and high expression of regulatory factors.

Text 295
10.1038/s41467-018-07581-4
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 5 cir rich cd4+ t cells have a distinct transcriptional program. a volcano plots of bulk rna sequencing data of indicated populations (il-10pos cir rich n = 2; il-10pos cir poor n = 2; il-10neg n = 2). b expression of known tr1 signature genes comparing il-10pos cir rich with il-10neg and il-10pos cir rich with il-10pos cir poor. c differentially expressed transcription factors between il-10pos cir rich and il-10pos cir poor. mrna expression of indicated genes normalized to hprt from at least three independent experiments (separated low-high, line represents median). d cd4+ t cells isolated from lxrα-/cd45.2 and wildtype cd45.2 mice were co-transferred with wildtype cd4+ t cells (cd45.1/2) into lymphopenic hosts. animals (wt:ko n = 7; wt:wt n = 6) were treated with acd3 antibodies 5 weeks upon transfer and cells were isolated from small intestine. results are cumulative of two independent experiments. a wilcoxon test was used to calculate significance. e correlation between genes significantly higher expressed in il-10pos cir rich versus il10pos cir poor cells and expression pattern of scrna-seq data']. Reference sentences:[after having established the use of cd49b/lag-3/il-10 as the most efficient gating strategy we then facs-sorted splenic cir rich and cir poor cells (supplementary figure 5) from both anti- cd3 treated and p. berghei infected mice and tested their suppressive capacity in vitro.cir cells were facs-sorted as lag-3 cd49b and il-10egfp high triple posi- tive while il-10-producing foxp3neg cir poor cd4+ t cells were il-10egfp high cells not co-expressing lag-3 and cd49b as shown in supplementary figure 5.the expression of il10 and most tr1 related surface receptors and markers was highly increased in cir rich cells compared to il- 10neg cells (fig 5b).in contrast between cir rich and cir poor cells only 174 genes were differentially expressed (fig 5a).the expression of il-10 related transcription factors was unaltered between cir rich and cir poor cells even though the expression of il10 was slightly higher in cir rich cells (fig 5b).we confirmed the expression pattern of some of these factors by qpcr (fig 5c).in addition id2 a factor that we found to be highly expressed in both sp c1 and si c1 in the single cell sequencing data set (fig 2b d) was also amongst the transcription factors highly expressed in cir rich cells (fig 5c).another intriguing transcription factor selectively expressed in cir rich cells was nr1h3 (fig 5d) encoding for liver x receptor α (lxrα).to this end we correlated the expression pattern of each cell from the scrna-seq analysis with the expression pattern of cir rich cells (fig 5e).we observed that cells in sp c1 and si c1/c2 showed higher correlation to the gene signature of cir rich cells (fig 5e).]
Correlation patterns between gene expressions in different cell populations.

Text 296
10.1016/j.celrep.2018.11.086
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 1. identification of human prostate cell clusters with bulk and single-cell rna sequencing (a) schematic of human tissue collection and processing for bulk and single-cell rna sequencing. (b) aggregated single-cell rna sequencing (scrna-seq) data from three organ donor prostate specimens with subclustering into stroma, epithelia, and unknown lineages based on correlation with bulk sequencing data (figure s2). clusters were identified and re-merged. (c) dot plot of cluster-specific genes after in silico removal of stressed cells and supervised identification of neuroendocrine epithelia.']. Reference sentences:[to determine transcrip- tomic differences among luminal basal and other epithelia gates cdna libraries from a bulk population of cells from each facs gate were prepared for sequencing (geo: gse120716) (figure 1a).approximately 34000 viable cells from each of the 3 specimens were loaded into a 103 genomics chromium controller for transcript barcoding (figure 1a).cell reports 25 3530–3542 december 18 2018 3531 after =10% of the total cells were removed due to a high stress signature a t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding (tsne) plot of the remaining 28606 non-stressed cells revealed eight clusters (figure 1b).we therefore used four stromal cell gene figure 1.as shown in figure 1b clus- ters 2 3 7 and 8 were highly correlated with bulk-sequenced stroma and identified as endothelia fibroblasts smooth muscle and leukocytes respectively (see star methods) (figure s4b).figure 1c displays a dot plot of the top five cluster-enriched degs to highlight spec- ificity for each cluster.using scrna-seq we derived a molecular iden- tity of 5 epithelial cell types and 2 stromal cell types in young adult human prostate (figure 1).]
Patterns related to correlation among different cell clusters in human prostate tissue were identified using single-cell transcriptomics.

Text 297
10.1016/j.stem.2018.11.015
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 6. comparison of inbscs and primary mouse nbscs (a) comparison of human inbsc and mouse pnbsc expression data. differential gene expression of inbscs versus adfs and pnbscs versus mefs was evaluated for its similarity by applying the agreement of differential expression procedure (agdex). the analysis shows a positive correlation of 0.475 (permutated p value of 0.0256). (b) shared biological processes enriched in inbscs and pnbscs. go processes are based on upregulated genes with log 2 fold change > 1 (258 genes) in inbsc and pnbscs lines. (c) biological processes downregulated in inbscs and pnbscs compared to adfs and mefs. go processes are based on shared 200 most downregulated genes in inbsc and pnbscs lines. (d) shared core network of inbscs and pnbscs. network analysis was performed on shared upregulated genes of inbscs and pnbscs with a log 2 fold change > 1.75 (74 genes) using the string v10 web interface; only connected nodes of the network are displayed. (e) comparison of human and mouse differentiation dynamics. gsea was performed on gene rankings based on fold changes comparing top 10% to bottom 10% of pseudo-time-ranked cells of pnbsc and inbsc cultures; the resulting enrichment scores were plotted and correlated. see also table s4.']. Reference sentences:[this analysis revealed a positive correlation of 0.457 for differential gene expression of inbscs and pnbscs (figure 6a).network analysis of the shared top upregulated genes (log 2 fold change > 1.75; 74 genes) using the search tool for the retrieval of interaction genes/proteins (string) revealed the core network of genes ex- pressed in pnbscs and inbscs (figure 6d; szklarczyk et al. 2015).we then performed gsea on genes ranked by their fold-change expression comparing the top and bottom 10% of pseudo- time-ranked cells reﬂecting the least and most differentiated cells within the cultures respectively and correlated the result- ing enrichment scores for inbscs and pnbscs (figure 6e).the gene sets showing the highest enrich- ment included the sensory-neuron-specific gene set (chambers et al. 2012) and terms such as ‘‘cell morphogenesis involved in differentiation’’ ‘‘mapkkk cascade’’ and ‘‘axon guidance’’ or ‘‘dna replication’’ ‘‘dna metabolic process’’ and ‘‘m phase’’ for the differentiation- and stem-cell-related portion of the cul- tures respectively (figure 6e).therefore nbscs represent a bona fide embryonic multipotent and self-renewing neural progenitor population that can be derived either by direct reprogramming of human adult figure 6.]
Summary: Positive correlation in gene expression between inbscs and pnbscs, shared biological processes, core network, and differentiation dynamics.

Text 298
10.1016/j.neuron.2018.12.006
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 3. limited transcriptomic heterogeneity of adult homeostatic microglia across brain regions (a) tsne plot (left) and violin plots (right) highlighting two p60 microglia clusters and examples of differentially expressed genes. (b) rna in situ showing negative expression of fos and egr1 in microglia (tmem119+) and positive signals from surrounding non-microglia cells. (c) quantification of ﬂuorescence signals in (b). n = 30 cells for each. (d) pearson correlation between bulk rna-seq samples from p60 brain regions. (e) dendrogram showing hierarchical clustering of bulk rna-seq samples, irrelevant of regions. (f) numbers of differentially expressed genes between homeostatic microglia from different regions by scrna-seq and bulk rna-seq. scale bar in (b) is 50 mm. see also figure s2 and tables s2 and s3.']. Reference sentences:[compared with cluster 0 only 27 total genes (including p2ry12) were differ- entially expressed in cluster 6 out of which half were immediate early genes (iegs) (table s2; figure 3a).because these iegs can figure 3.indeed we found that less than 20 genes were differentially ex- pressed (false discovery rate [fdr] < 0.05) in typical adult micro- glia (cluster 0) between regions (figure 3f; table s3).moreover we could not detect any differentially expressed genes (fdr < 0.05) be- tween regions from the bulk samples (figure 3f; table s3).]
limited correlation in gene expression between adult microglia clusters across brain regions, with few differentially expressed genes.

Text 299
10.1016/j.neuron.2018.12.006
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 5. heterogeneity of early postnatal microglia revealed by scrna-seq (a) re-clustering of p7 microglia (as in figure 4a) to highlight that p7-c2 are mainly embryonic-like cells (cluster 5) in the original clustering result. (b) violin plots showing some differentially expressed genes between p7-c2 and the other two clusters. (c) heatmap showing top 70 differentially expressed genes between p7-c0 and p7-c1. p7-c0 express higher levels of homeostatic genes and p7-c1 enrich many disease-associated genes. (d) comparison of gene expression changes in dam (relative to homeostatic microglia) with the changes in p7-c1 (relative to p7-c0) showing similar sets of up- and downregulated genes in two cases. (e) gene network showing correlated gene modules underlying cluster identities of p7 microglia (see star methods). each gene is colored based on its differential expression levels among three p7 clusters. solid lines are for positive correlation and dashed lines are for negative correlation. see also table s5.']. Reference sentences:[cells belonging to p7-c2 expressed microglial signature genes at lower levels (e.g. tmem119 selplg p2ry12 and tgfbr1) and displayed upre- gulation of genes in metal homeostasis (fth1 ftl1 and mt1) actin cytoskeleton dynamics (tmsb4x pfn1 and cﬂ1) and ribosomal components (e.g. rps14 rps18 rpl35 and rps29; figure 5b; table s5).microglia from both clusters expressed homeostatic genes such as tmem119 p2ry12 tgfbr1 siglech and sall1 but p7-c1 cells expressed them at lower levels (figure 5c; table s5).these included spp1 gpnmb igf1 clec7a lpl cd9 cd63 lgals3 fabp5 itgax apoe and tyrobp (figure 5c).when we directly compared differentially ex- pressed genes in p7-c1 (relative to p7-c0) with those mis-regu- lated in dam we found that they were strikingly similar in that up- regulation of the disease genes was accompanied by downregulation of the homeostatic gene cassette (figure 5d).to obtain a better understanding of the genes underlying p7 mi- croglial heterogeneity we generated a gene network based on correlation between pairs of genes in all p7 microglia (figure 5e; see star methods).interestingly starting at p14 and becoming more prominent during adulthood clec7a+ microglia were also observed in the hippocampal dentate gyrus figure 5.]
Correlated gene modules defining cluster identities in microglia, with similar gene expression changes between disease-associated and homeostatic states.

Text 300
10.1016/j.cell.2018.11.029
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 3. multiplex enhancer-gene pair screening at scale in k562 cells (a) for a scaled experiment, grnas were designed to target a total of 5,779 candidate enhancers. characteristics are shown for 3,853 sites chosen by a model informed by the hits identified in the pilot experiment. (b) 948 exploratory candidate enhancers were sampled from k562 dhss. 978 candidate enhancers from the pilot were re-targeted with the same grna pair, and 377 of these were also targeted with a second, alternative grna pair. (c) grnas were again delivered to k562 cells, but at a higher moi than the pilot experiment (median 28 ± 15.3 grnas identified per cell). (d) a total of 207,324 single cell transcriptional profiles were generated. each perturbation was identified in a median of 915 ± 280 single cells. (e) q-q plot of the differential expression tests. distributions of observed versus expected p values for candidate enhancer-targeting grnas that were correlated with decrease in target gene expression (orange) and ntc grnas (gray; downsampled) are shown. (f) histogram of the number of target genes impacted by each candidate enhancer identified as part of a pair (10% empirical fdr). (g) histogram of the number of paired candidate enhancers detected as regulating each target gene (10% empirical fdr). (h) effect sizes for the 664 enhancer-gene pairs that pass a <0.1 empirical fdr, the 470 high-confidence enhancer-gene pairs, and the 97% of tss controls that are detected as repressing their target genes. see also figure s2e and table s2.']. Reference sentences:[we profiled the transcriptomes of 207324 single cells and identified a median of 28 ± 15.3 grnas per cell (figure 3c).each candidate enhancer was targeted in a median of 915 ± 280 single cells (figure 3d).testing for associ- ations as previously a quantile-quantile plot again showed an inﬂation of significant associations involving the targeting of number of paired candidate enhancers impacting each target gene number of target genes that each paired candidate enhancer impacts 547 44 7 2 0 200 400 600 4 3 1 2 4 3 1 2 5 6 7 8 366 77 21 5 3 4 2 1 0 100 200 300 400 1075 1018 508 374 284 232 69 63 48 38 23 21 21 19 18 8 6 4 4 2 2 1 candidate enhancers gata1 rna pol ii h3k27ac p300 gata2 1200 900 600 300 a at-scale grna library designed to target 5779 candidate enhancers 3853 sites picked by model built from pilot data + + 978 sites also in pilot 377 with alt grna pair + 948 diverse sites b 0 2000 4000 6000 0 25 50 75 100 count grnas per cell c d e g f 0 1 2 3 4 5 0 50 100 150 200 250 300 -log10(observed p-values) -log10(expected p-values) count number of cells bearing each perturbation 0 250 500 750 0 500 1000 1500 2000 2 number of target genes number of candidate enhancers 100 75 50 25 0 % target gene repression tss 470 high- confidence pairs controls 664 pairs h figure 3.as targeting of 53/600 candidate enhancers downregulated more than one gene (figure 3f) we collectively identified a total of 664 enhancer-gene pairs (table s2b).these ranged in effect size from =1.4% to =97.5% target gene repression (figure 3h).these ranged in effect size from =7.9% to =97.5% (figure 3h).foremost although a wide range of effect sizes (7.9% to 97.5% for the 470 high-confidence pairs figure 3h) were observed on genes with a broad range of expression levels (0.0058 to 313 umis/cell figure 6c) effect sizes were correlated with expression levels (spearman’s rho 0.53; figure s5d).only 15 sites did not overlap any of the marks shown in figure 3a.replication of effect across experiments and alternative grna pairs related to figure 3 (a) the percent target gene repression of an enhancer-gene pair in the pilot versus the scaled experiments (green: called as a pair in both experiments; purple: called as pair in only one experiment).]
Patterns related to correlation between candidate enhancers and target gene expression levels were analyzed in 207,324 single cells.

Text 301
10.1016/j.cell.2018.11.029
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 1. multiplex enhancer-gene pair screening (a) enhancer-gene pairs are screened by introducing random combinations of crispr/cas9 candidate enhancer perturbations to each of many cells, followed by scrna-seq to capture expression levels of all transcripts. then, all candidate enhancers are tested against any gene by correlating presence of any perturbation with reduction of any transcript. (b) multiplex perturbations increase power to detect changes in expression in single-cell genetic screens while greatly reducing the number of cells that need to be profiled. power calculations on simulated data show that increasing the number of perturbations per cell increases power to detect changes in expression, including for genes with low (0.10 mean umis per cell), medium (0.32), or high (1.00) mean expression. x axis corresponds to the simulated % repression of target transcript.']. Reference sentences:[here we introduce a framework (figure 1a) designed to over- come both limitations.introducing multi- ple perturbations per cell markedly increases power (figure 1b).additional pairs of grnas served as positive controls (targeting the transcription start sites [tsss] of genes sampled from the top decile of k562 expression or alternatively hyper- a 0 25 50 75 100 25 50 75 25 50 75 25 50 75 % reduction of target transcript % of gene expression changes detectable medium high low expression level average perturbations per cell 0.3 1 5 15 30 50 b expression expression random combinations of multiplex perturbations candidate enhancer target gene figure 1.at a 10% empirical fdr only 316 tsss and 69 enhancer-gene pairs were identified in the low moi experiment as compared with 359 tsss and 226 enhancer-gene pairs in the high moi pilot experiment validating the substantial increase in power resulting from multiplexed perturbation (figure 1b).however its power and scope was limited by a low moi (figure 1b) and a grna barcoding strategy that suffers from a =50% rate of tem- plate switching (hill et al. 2018; xie et al. 2018).by examining the range of expression values observed in our data we chose to simulate expression data for genes having mean expression values (size parameter of the negative binomial distribution) of 0.01 0.1 0.32 1.0 3.16 and 10.0 umis (0.10 0.32 and 1.00 used respectively as low medium and high in figure 1b) to provide a range of representative values.finally we simulated several values of total cells included in the experiment ranging from 35000 to 300000 cells (45000 cells shown in figure 1b).]
Patterns of correlation between multiplex enhancer-gene pairs and changes in gene expression levels in single cells.

Text 302
10.1016/j.cell.2018.11.029
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 7. crispri is robust to multiplexing within a cell (a) a biological replicate of the pilot study, targeting the same 1,119 candidate enhancers and 381 tsss, was performed at a low moi (median 1 ± 1.6 grnas identified per cell). (b) a total of 41,284 single cell transcriptional profiles were generated. each perturbation was identified in a median of 43 ± 16 single cells. (c) correlation of effect sizes for tss controls (top, purple) or enhancer-gene pairs identified in the scaled experiment (10% empirical fdr, bottom, orange) across increasing rates of grna per cell (left, 1 versus 15; middle, 15 versus 28; right, 1 versus 28 grnas/cell). point sizes are proportional to each target gene’s expression level. (d) the ratios of repression for each tss control or paired candidate enhancer (as identified with a 10% empirical fdr in any experiment) in the low moi experiment versus a high moi experiment (top = median 1 grna versus 15 grnas; bottom = median 1 grna versus 28 grnas). the candidate enhancer outliers with stronger effect sizes in the low moi experiment (right panel, ratios in long left tail) are likely largely due to stochastic undersampling of lowly expressed target genes in the low moi experiment (see also figure s6).']. Reference sentences:[from this experiment we profiled the transcriptomes of 41284 cells and identified a median of 1 ± 1.6 grnas per cell (figure 7a).each perturbation was only seen in a median of 43 ± 16 cells as compared with 516 ± 177 cells in the high moi pilot experiment (figure 7b).as the same 381 tss controls were targeted in the low moi pilot and scaled experiments we compared the degree of repression conferred by crispri at increasing moi (median 1 versus 15 a b c d figure 7.on average the degree of repression conferred by targeting a tss in both high moi experiments was only =6% less than by targeting it in the low moi experiment (figure 7d).similarly for candidate enhancers paired in the scaled experiment (10% empirical fdr) that were also targeted in the low moi and pilot experiments effect sizes were well correlated (spearman’s rho’s ranging from 0.54 to 0.70; figure 7c) and effect sizes ratios clustered around 1 (fig- ure 7d).outliers with greater effect size in low moi replicate are likely due to low expression and low cell count in low moi replicate related to figure 7 the mean expression of the target gene in the low moi 41284 cell dataset as a function of the number of cells bearing each perturbation in that experiment.]
Summary: Correlation of gene expression changes for tss controls and enhancer-gene pairs across different grna rates, with outliers likely due to low expression and cell count variability.

Text 303
10.1038/s41590-018-0276-y
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 1 | reference-based annotation of scrna-seq. a, schematic of singler, a protocol for cell type annotation by reference to transcriptomes of pure cell types. b, t-sne plot of a published scrna-seq data set of fibroblasts and bmdcs16 (top left). heatmap of singler scores for top correlated cell types (top right). singler annotation of cell identity indicated on t-sne plot (bottom left). expression in single cells of genes derived by differential expression analysis of published microarray data from bone marrow-derived, gm-csf-cultured macrophages (gm-macs) and dcs (gm-dcs)19 (bottom right). c, t-sne plots of a published scrna-seq data set of pbmcs21 analyzed by seurat without (top) and with (middle) singler annotations indicated for individual cells. cell type markers expressed by singler annotation (bottom). dc, dendritic cell; tcm, central memory t cell; tem, effector memory t cell; treg, regulatory t cell.']. Reference sentences:[when applied to the immgen database12 as a ref- erence library singler identified 33 of the 48 cells thought in the study to be bmdcs as macrophages (fig 1b and supplementary note 2).in com- parison to marker-based and reference-based approaches21–23 which are limited in their ability to distinguish cell states singler differentiated cellular subtypes such as memory and naïve b and t cells (fig 1c and supplementary fig 1).top 50 upregulated by fold-change gm- csf-cultured dendritic cell genes and top 50 gm-csf-cultured macrophage genes were used in fig 1b.single-cell rna-seq counts from hashimshony et al.16 used in fig 1b were downloaded from the archs project54.]
Summary: Identification of cell types based on correlation patterns in single-cell transcriptomics data, distinguishing cellular subtypes and differentiating cell states.

Text 304
10.1038/s41467-018-08079-9
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 4 putative ciliopathy disease subtypes associate with clinical phenotypes. normalized expression values for genes mutated in ciliopathies were hierarchically clustered, and the gene dendrogram (pearson correlation) was cut at a set height (red line) to identify clusters of genes with similar celltype- and age-specific expression profiles. counts indicating how many genes within a given subtype associated with a specific clinical phenotype are provided as a table. median-centered normalized expression values are depicted from blue (–0.25) to white (0.0) to red (0.25)']. Reference sentences:[to assign biological labels to each of these cell types we first identified cluster-specific marker genes similar to other single-cell tran- scriptomic studies1112 (fig 1b c fig 2 supplementary figure 4).these genes were also highly expressed in rg of the cortical hem (rg3 cluster 21-e supplementary figure 4) where some cajal-retzius cells are known to originate4445.we defined classes of disease-linked genes with shared cellular expression at the individual cell type level and summarized across broader cellular classes (fig 4 5 supple- mentary figures 21–24 see methods).genes mutated in ciliopathies segregated into four subtypes (fig 4).]
Patterns of gene expression correlation in different cell types associated with ciliopathy disease subtypes and clinical phenotypes.

Text 305
10.1038/s41467-018-08079-9
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 2 characterization of cell types in the developing cortex. cell types were grouped into categories (colored), based on their functional identity and transcriptional similarity (pearson correlation distances, dendrogram). correlation of expression with gene length provided on a scale of white to blue. total number of cells identified for each cluster is provided. fractional proportions of cortical cells, averaged across all biological replicates, is depicted as a pie chart; non-cortical cells were excluded. number of cellular sub-clusters for each cell type is indicated, as well as three sub-cluster examples. all subclusters are fully characterized in supplementary materials']. Reference sentences:[to assign biological labels to each of these cell types we first identified cluster-specific marker genes similar to other single-cell tran- scriptomic studies1112 (fig 1b c fig 2 supplementary figure 4).each cell type exhibited similar overall transcript levels and cell proportions among biological replicates suggesting that none of the clusters were skewed by residual batch effects (supplementary figure 2 and 5).to assess the overall proportions of cellular classes at each age we first grouped the cortical cells into four broad categories (layer- specific interneurons progenitor-like and non-neuronal) (fig 2).next we assessed the specific cellular composition as well as the transcriptional similarity of these identified cell types across ages using hierarchical clustering with correlation-based distances (fig 2).we identified sub-clusters in seven of the 22 cell types at e14.5 and in five of the 22 cell types at p0 (fig 2 supplementary figures 18 19).we found that dkk3+ cells were present in both the cortical hem and layer i (fig 3c–h supplementary figure 20).]
Summary: Correlation-based patterns of cell types in developing cortex, with marker genes and sub-clusters identified.

Text 306
10.1016/j.devcel.2018.11.048
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 5. high methylation in the ur2 enhancer of arx in ppcs correlates with the production of b cells in all panels, black and open circles indicate methylated or non-methylated cpg dinucleotides, respectively. (a) a diagram showing the location of ur2 in arx.']. Reference sentences:[ur2 methylation status in individual dna molecules from neurog3+ cells varied greatly with some analyte copies showing most of the cpg dinucleotides as methylated yet none in others (figure 5b).consistent with this hypothesis the b-cell-biased m+n+ progenitors showed a significantly higher ur2 methylation frequency than the a-cell- biased m=n+ cells (figure 5c; p = 0.025).azac treatment which increased a cell specification (reported above) significantly reduced ur2 methylation in neurog3+ progenitor cells (figure 5e) while dnmt3boe which failed to alter islet-cell-type specification did not affect ur2 methylation in neurog3+ cells (p = 0.44) (figure 5f).moreover developmental cell 48 49–63 january 7 2019 55 neurog3egfp expressing heterozygous progenitors at e10.5 which predominantly give rise to a cells had significantly lower dna methylation than e14.5 cells (figure 5g versus figure 5a; p = 0.03).56 developmental cell 48 49–63 january 7 2019 figure 5.]
Summary: Correlation between ur2 methylation in arx enhancer and b cell production in single cells.

Text 307
10.1016/j.celrep.2018.12.044
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 3. adult v-svz neuronal lineage and temporal regulatory steps (a) force-directed graphs showing the lineage progression from dormant astrocytes to nbs and a schematic summary. (b) fraction of each cell type represented by circles (gray, mean; black, mean + sd; two biological replicates). the compositions of ansc1, ansc2+tac, and nb populations were extracted from combined clustering of neuronal progenitors from two biological replicates. (c) heatmap (scaled by row) showing average expression of functional markers (fdr < 0.05) in different neuronal progenitor subtypes. (d) representative images of doublecortin (dcx) immunostaining at different rostro-caudal levels of the v-svz (level 1, bregma +1.41 mm; level 2, bregma +0.73 mm). scale bar, 50 mm. (e) quantification of dcx+ cell proportions at different rostro-caudal levels of the v-svz (n = 3; mean + sem) (p < 0.05). level 3, bregma +0.1 mm. (f) (left) heatmap showing correlation matrix for significant tf modules. both axes show tfs with the same dimensionality. the correlation between the same tf was set to 0 for visualization purposes. (right) significant tf clusters (figure s5a; table s4) were ordered based on their dispersion on force-directed graphs. the average expressions of tf modules in each cell were plotted on force-directed graphs. modules with distinct expression patterns were separated with white lines in the heatmap. representative tfs from different modules are shown in the panel, and tfs associated with previously undescribed co-expression patterns in each module are highlighted in bold. see also figure s5 and tables s2 and s4.']. Reference sentences:[lineage trajectories generated using all astrocyte and neuronal progenitor clusters revealed that non-dividing astrocytes were connected to anscs via a narrow path of activation representing transitional cells (figure 3a).these transitional cells clustered with astro.2 and were in a continuous trajectory that progressed via two sequential stages of anscs (ansc1 and ansc2/tac) to neuroblasts suggesting a key role for astro.2 in nsc activation (figure 3a).interestingly expression of proliferation markers (e.g. mki67 mcm2 and top2a) in the neuronal lineage peaked in ansc1s ansc2s and tacs and decreased in dcx+ nbs (figure 3c; table s2).moreover transition cells upregulated ascl1 and egfr prior to canonical cell cycle genes (e.g. mki67 mcm2 and top2a) revealing that stem cell activation and cell prolifera- tion can be uncoupled (figure 3c).to independently validate this finding in vivo we performed immunostaining for ng2 an opc marker and quantified opcs in the septal and 398 cell reports 26 394–406 january 8 2019 a f b level 1 level 2 dcx dapi sw lw sw lw transition ansc1 + tac nb d e level 1 level 2 level 3 islr2 dcx tubb3 cd24a fxyd6 ascl1 egfr notum s100a6 ube2c mki67 top2a helt cdk6 mcm2 dlx2 1 0.5 0 -1 -0.5 ansc2 20% 10% 5% 2% lw lw sw sw lateral septal 0 10 20 30 40 50 dcx/dapi (%) lw sw c ansc1 ansc2 +tac nb 2 figure 3.]
Summary: Correlation patterns of transcription factors in different cell types along neuronal lineage progression.

Text 308
10.1016/j.celrep.2018.12.044
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 4. regional and sex differences in oligodendrocyte lineage (a) force-directed graphs showing oligodendrocyte lineage progression from opcs to mols (mol, mature oligodendrocytes; nfol/mfol, newly formed and myelin-forming oligodendrocytes) in four samples and a schematic summary of the lineage differentiation order. (b) the fraction of each cell type in different samples is represented with circles (gray, mean; black, mean + sd; two biological replicates). red box indicates regional enrichment and blue box indicates both regional and sex-specific enrichment. (c) quantification of ng2+ soma demonstrating sex- and region-specific differences in opc density (%ng2/dapi; p < 0.05; n = 3; mean + sem). note fibers were not quantified. (d) representative images of ng2 immunostainings in the v-svz from male and female mice. scale bar: 50 mm. (e) force-directed graphs with both neuronal and oligodendrocyte lineages and a schematic summary of the differentiation order and branching point of these lineages. see also figure s4d and video s1. (f) (left) heatmap showing correlation matrix for significant tf modules. both axes show tfs with the same dimensionality. the correlation between the same tf was set to 0 for visualization purposes. (right) significant tf clusters (figure s5b; table s4) were ordered based on their dispersion on force-directed graphs.']. Reference sentences:[we next generated a force-directed visualization of the oligodendrocyte lineage k-nearest neighbors graph to define their lineage order (figure 4a) which recapitulated the predicted lineage order previously reported from single cell rna (scrna)- seq profiles of oligodendrocyte differentiation (marques et al. 2016; figure s2e).cell reports 26 394–406 january 8 2019 399 figure 4.these previously uncharacterized temporal modules comprised oligodendrocyte lineage progres- sion tfs (e.g. kcnip3 olig2 sox2 and klf9; maki et al. 2013; marques et al. 2016; tokumoto et al. 2017; wu et al. 2012) and co-expression partners (e.g. hes5 eno1 sox21 purb zfp275 foxj2 zeb2 tsc22d3 and hopx; figure 4f).]
Summary: Correlation patterns of transcription factors in oligodendrocyte lineage progression, visualized by force-directed graphs and heatmaps.

Text 309
10.3389/fimmu.2018.02902
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 3: aire in peripheral dendritic cells is not associated with tissue-restricted antigen expression. populations of etacs (n=4), cdcs (n=4, paired donors) and mtecs (n=3, distinct donors) were sorted and the entire transcriptome sequenced as a bulk population, for detecting tissuerestricted antigen expression. a) genes were assigned as tissue-restricted using the tissue-specificity index (see materials & methods). proportions of expressed genes in this category in etacs, cdcs and mtecs and in specific peripheral tissues are shown. b) principal components analysis of etacs, cdcs and mtecs samples using all expressed tra genes. shown are the first 2 major components of variation, corresponding to 60.34% and 11.09% of the variance, respectively. c) a heatmap illustrating the similarity of cdcs, etacs and mtecs based on the pearson correlation of expression of tissue restricted antigen genes. dendrograms represent average-linkage hierarchical clustering on the pearson correlation values. d) log2 expression of genes homologous to aire-dependent tras identified in mice within bulk sequenced cdcs (blue), etacs (green) and mtecs (black). see also supplementary figure 4.']. Reference sentences:[]
Summary: Correlation patterns of tissue-restricted antigen gene expression in different single cells were analyzed using Pearson correlation values.

Text 310
10.1016/j.celrep.2018.12.099
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 3. naive and primed populations do not exhibit lineage-associated structure, but correlations between lineage markers and epigenetic regulators are stronger under the naive condition (a and b) gene expression of germ layer-specific marker genes in the (a) naive and (b) primed population, visualized using tsne on the batch-corrected normalized log expression values. each point in the scatterplot represents a cell, which is colored by the expression of respective mesoderm (snai1), ectoderm (itga6), or endoderm (paf1) markers. (c and d) heatmaps of the strongest correlation values between selected pluripotency and lineage markers (rows) and epigenetic markers (columns) for the naive (c) and the primed (d) population. the correlation values were bound at [à0.5, 0.5]. see also figure s3 and tables s3 and s4.']. Reference sentences:[we observed strong correlations in the naive popu- lation (figure 3c) that were much weaker in the primed population (figure 3d).finally we catalog and compare pluripotency identity across species to characterize transitions between different a c b d −5 0 5 −6 −4 −2 0 2 4 6 8 dimension 1 dimension 2 0 2 4 6 snai1 −5 0 5 −6 −4 −2 0 2 4 6 8 naive dimension 1 0 2 4 6 itga6 −5 0 5 −6 −4 −2 0 2 4 6 8 dimension 1 0 2 4 6 paf1 −4 −2 0 2 4 −5 0 5 dimension 1 dimension 2 43210 5 snai1 −4 −2 0 2 4 −5 0 5 primed dimension 1 0.0 2.5 5.0 7.5 itga6 −4 −2 0 2 4 −5 0 5 dimension 1 0 2 4 6 paf1 naive dpf2 vps72 smarca4 rcc1 prmt1 pkm uhrf1 ube2t rrp8 usp11 hmg20b nat10 hmgb1 ube2d3 hat1 hdac2 hjurp ncoa1 ash1l nfyb dnajc2 hmgn1 smarcad1 ube2d1 pak2 apoe cldn6 tead4 ncln pou5f1 utf1 klf4 epcam dppa3 sycp3 tfap2c tbx3 gata6 krt19 klf5 twist2 snai1 sall4 tdgf1 nanog zfp42 fgf4 gdf3 nodal tubb3 −0.4 −0.2 0 0.2 0.4 primed dpf2 vps72 smarca4 rcc1 prmt1 pkm uhrf1 ube2t rrp8 usp11 hmg20b nat10 hmgb1 ube2d3 hat1 hdac2 hjurp ncoa1 ash1l nfyb dnajc2 hmgn1 smarcad1 ube2d1 pak2 apoe cldn6 tead4 ncln pou5f1 utf1 klf4 epcam dppa3 sycp3 tfap2c tbx3 gata6 krt19 klf5 twist2 snai1 sall4 tdgf1 nanog zfp42 fgf4 gdf3 nodal tubb3 −0.4 −0.2 0 0.2 0.4 figure 3.]
Summary: Strong correlations between lineage markers and epigenetic regulators are observed in naive cells compared to primed cells.

Text 311
10.1038/s41467-018-08205-7
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 2 inferring regulatory relationships between cres and genes by sccat-seq. a overview of three strategies for inferring regulatory relationships. strategy 1: regulatory links for every gene were assigned when the spearman correlation of the signal of peaks located at the promoter and distal peaks was above 0.25. strategy 2: the regulatory links were assigned if the spearman correlation between the gene expression and the signal of distal peaks was above 0.25. strategy 3: active transcription factors for every cell were identified by scenic, then active regions were identified by matching the binding motifs of active transcription factors to accessible regions. then regulatory relationships were assigned after applying a wilcoxon test to determine if the presence of a nearby active accessible region was associated with a significant change in the target gene expression (p-value < 0.05). b venn plot showing the number of overlapping regulatory relationships identified by the three strategies. c proportion of chia-pet validated regulatory relationships identified by the three strategies in k562 (left), hela-s3 (middle), and hct116 (right) single cells. d, f heatmaps showing exposure scores of all cells to each signature identified by the nmf clustering of regulatory relationship binary matrices of cell lines (d) and pdxs (f). the exposure score represents the contributions of the signatures to the different samples. e, g regulatory relationships for the indicated genes in single-cell groups of the cell lines (e) and pdx2 (g). each panel contains three tracks: the top track shows the regulatory relationship between one peak and the gene (linking them with an arch), where the height and color of the arch show the proportion of cells that share the regulatory relationships; the middle track shows the genomic location of the gene and the associated peaks, where the color of the gene shows the mean expression in each cell type; the bottom track shows the accessible states (on and off) for each peak in each single cell']. Reference sentences:[principal components analysis (pca) on both ca and ge profiles resulted in separation of cells from different origin (supplementary figure 2a b).a comparison of our datasets with published profiles revealed that the differences across protocols and batches had a substantially smaller effect than difference across cell types (supplementary figure 2c d).to this end while employing the reported strategy using scatac-seq10 (strategy 1 fig 2a) we proposed two additional strategies for inferring regulatory relationships (strategies 2 and 3 fig 2a).based on the sca- tac-seq data regulatory relationships for every gene were assigned when the spearman correlation of the accessibility of cres located at the promoter and distal peaks was above 0.25 (strategy 1 fig 2a and methods).likewise for the sccat-seq data the regulatory links were assigned if the spearman correlation between the ge and the accessibility of distal cres was above 0.25 (strategy 2 fig 2a and methods).in order to more accurately depict the regulatory relationship between chromatin and genes in strategy 3 single-cell-specific regulatory relationships between genes and their nearby accessible regions were assigned using the sccat-seq data as follows: (i) identifica- tion of active tfs for every cell by scenic22 using the normalized ge matrix; (ii) identification of active accessible regions by matching the binding motifs of active tfs to accessible chromatin regions; and (iii) assignment of regulatory relationships after applying a wilcoxon test to determine if the presence of a nearby active accessible region was associated with a significant change in the target ge (p-value < 0.05) (fig 2a and methods).by applying the 3 strategies to single cells of the 3 cell lines we found that strategy 3 identified the largest number of regulatory relationships (62769) compared to strategy 1 (46813) and strategy 2 (21219) (fig 2b).encouragingly using the chia-pet interactions of the three widely used cell types (k562 hela-s3 and hct116)24 we observed higher proportion of validations in sccat-seq based method (strategies 2 and 3) than that in scatac- seq based method (strategy 1) in all three cell types (fig 2c).as expected nmf clustering of the regulatory relationships identified signatures containing numerous cell type-specific regulatory relationships resulting in clear separation of the three cell types (fig 2d e and supplementary figure 3c).we observed highly specific regulatory relationships around samsn1 in k562 a myelogenous leukemia cell line (fig 2e) revealing a strong association between its expression and accessibility of cres.likewise we generated regulatory relationship matrix for single cells from pdx tissues and clustering of the matrix clearly separated these two type of cells (fig 2f g and supplementary figure 3d).interestingly we also observed a subpopulation of cells showing specific regulatory relationships in pdx2 (fig 2f g) likely reﬂecting the regulatory heterogeneity present in real tissues.]
Summary: Identification of regulatory relationships between accessible regions and gene expression in single cells based on correlation patterns.

Text 312
10.1038/s41564-018-0346-9
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 4 | functional consequences of stochastic gene expression. a, overlay of four representative variable genes from the galactose metabolism kegg category over the tsne plot from fig 3e. each dot represents cells in the by4741 dataset (n=127 cells); the colour scale represents the normalized umi expression. b, expression of all of the variable galactose-related genes. each stacked bar represents the normalized umi expression for the indicated genes in each by4741 cell. the bars are ordered on the basis of their sorted position in the plate. c, heatmap representing the pairwise pearson’s correlation of variable galactose-related genes using the normalized number of umis per cell (log2) across the by4741 dataset (n=127). the warmer colours indicate a stronger correlation and colder colours represent a weaker correlation. d, the s. cerevisiae strain ysmn235 (by4741 gal3–gfp) was exponentially cultured in ypd medium. two groups of 10,000 cells were sorted according to their gfp intensity in ypd media. populations of cells expressing gfp at an intensity in the top 2% (gal3–gfp top 2%) and a random sort (gal3–gfp random) were sorted by facs into yp media with no sugar and quickly inoculated into either ypd or ypgal media. the growth curves were measured over 48h with a synergy h1 plate reader. data were obtained by measuring optical density (od660) every 1.5h.']. Reference sentences:[we overlaid the expression of variable galactose genes (gal3 emi2 glk1 and hxk1) onto the tsne (fig 4a) as well as representative exam- ples of the remaining kegg-enriched pathways (supplementary fig 4a).interestingly for by4741 we detected the expression of at least one variable gene that belongs to the galactose pathway in virtually all cells (fig 4b).we did not observe any strong correlations between gene pairs which suggests uncoordinated reg- ulation of expression in single cells cultured in ypd (fig 4c).although all populations had a similar growth rate in ypd the top 2% of cells expressing gal3 in ypd displayed an increased fitness in galactose (fig 4d).]
Patterns of correlation between variable genes in the galactose metabolism pathway across single cells, with no strong correlations observed.

Text 313
10.1038/s41564-018-0346-9
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 2 | yscrna-seq as a tool to quantitatively profile transcriptional architectures and tss variation. a, distribution of all rna species counted from yscrna-seq libraries prepared from 127 by4741 cells that were exponentially grown in ypd medium. the gene feature annotation was conducted based on xu and colleagues12. density represents the distribution of the expressed genes (≥1umi). the mean of the distribution for each gene feature is shown; suts (stable unannotated transcripts) and cuts (cryptic unstable transcripts). b, distribution of genome-wide pearson’s correlation values between transcripts in divergent orientations (n=2,555; p=2.63×10−9, one-tailed wilcoxon test), annotated orfs with antisense transcripts originating from their 3′-untranslated region (n=202; p=1.45×10−19, one-tailed wilcoxon test), paralogs (n=370; p=3.6×10−9, one-tailed wilcoxon test) and a subset of random genes (n=1,846). the classification of the bidirectional and sense–antisense transcripts was obtained from xu et al.12 and the paralogs from kellis and colleagues17. c, spearman’s correlation between the number of tss isoforms per gene that were identified by yscrna-seq and by tif-seq6. the tsss detected by yscrna (x axis) were obtained by pooling all yscrna-seq libraries for all by4741 cells (n=127) and comparing them to tif-seq6. d, ranked mean number of tsss. each dot represents the mean number of tsss detected per gene per cell for by4741 (n=127 cells) for genes that were detected in at least one cell (252 of 7,272 genes were not detected). the mean of all tsss is indicated by a dashed line. e, representative example of tss usage in single cells. the binary heatmap represents the position (x axis) and the usage (yellow) of the identified tsss over yll014w across all by4741 yscrna-seq libraries that were obtained from two biological replicates. a tss was considered to be ‘used’ if at least two umis per position were detected. each row represents an individual cell and each column represents the position relative to the tss identified by tif-seq6. f, cumulative sum of the number of tsss used (y axis) across by4741 (x axis) in comparison to the total number of 5′ tsss observed by tif-seq6 (red dashed lines; approximately 148,000 5′ isoforms).']. Reference sentences:[meanwhile ncrnas—cryptic unstable transcripts (cuts) stable unanno- tated transcripts (suts) and others—only represented 9.5% of the detected rna pool (fig 2a and supplementary table 2).overall we observed a good genome-wide expression correlation in individual cells or across all samples (pearson’s correlation coef- ficient = 0.66–0.83; supplementary fig 2ab).we found that 250000 reads recapitulated 90% of the total num- ber of genes detected indicating that even at a low sequencing depth yscrna-seq captures a large fraction of the transcriptome (supplementary fig 2c) which can further lower the cost per cell.to assess the genome-wide transcriptional architectures by exploiting the sensitivity and strand-specific nature of yscrna- seq we analysed the correlation between paralogous genes (those that arose from whole-genome duplication17) sense–antisense pairs (saps) and divergent transcripts12 (fig 2b).in contrast when we investigated the expression of gene pairs that originate from bidirectional promoters and paralogs we observed a positive correlation for both groups (p = 2.63 × 10−9 and 3.6 × 10−9 respectively one-tailed wilcoxon test; fig 2b).from the sum of isoforms per gene across all cells we detected a linear correlation between the tss numbers per gene determined by tif-seq and yscrna-seq (spearman’s correlation = 0.63; fig 2c).on average each gene expressed 3.46 umis (supplementary fig 2e); however the mean number of tsss per gene across all cells was 1.19 (fig 2d).when we clustered cells on the basis of the tss variabil- ity of a representative gene (yll014w with a mean of 3.09 umis and 1.25 tsss of a total of 8 used-tss positions in our dataset) the majority of cells expressed only one isoform (coinciding with the bulk tsss detected by tif-seq6 at position 0) 32 cells co-expressed a second isoform from a different tss and in some rare cases three isoforms were detected (fig 2e).furthermore although the major isoform dominated the expression the second isoform was still abundant within the population (supplementary fig 2f).to understand how tss variability in single cells leads to the observed population isoform diversity we assessed the contribu- tion of each cell by computing the cumulative sum of unique tss isoforms per cell comparing the result to the total number of tif- seq6 5′ -tss isoforms (a total of 148000 5′ isoforms with ≥ 2 reads; fig 2f).]
Patterns related to correlation between paralogous genes, sense-antisense pairs, and divergent transcripts were observed in single-cell transcriptomics data.

Text 314
10.1016/j.immuni.2019.01.001
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 4. recruitment and adaptation of treg cells to the tumor environment recapitulates steady-state migration (a) melanoma induction strategy and sampled tissues. (b) t-sne depicting treg and tmem cells from tumor and steady-state skin, draining brachial lymph nodes, and spleen. (c) differential expression between skin and tumor treg cells. treg cells classified as cycling were excluded. (d) (top) latent variables found with mrd-bgplvm representing cell cycle (lv5) and non-lymphoid tissue recruitment/adaptation of treg cells (lv9). (bottom) distribution of cells based on tissue and condition and cell-cycle phase along the recruitment trajectory. (e) difference in activation time (t0) of genes in control and tumor. genes are classified as being markers of skin, lymph node, cell cycle, or other. colored points show mean ± mean se for each group. vertical dashed lines represent the mean ± se for all t0 values. t test between control and melanoma t0 indicates no change (p value = 0.2631), with t0 values having a spearman correlation coefficient of 0.65 between both conditions. see also figure s4.']. Reference sentences:[we therefore purified treg and tmem cells from b16.f10 mela- nomas or pbs controls 11 days after subcutaneous implantation into foxp3-ires-egfp reporter mice (haribhai et al. 2007) to produce a plate-based scrna-seq dataset (figure 4a; see experimental procedures).skin and tumor treg cells clustered separately (figure 4b).to this end we used the mrd-bgplvm algo- rithm (damianou et al. 2012) (see experimental procedures) to explore gene expression trends across treg cells from the control skintumorandrespectivedraining-lnstogether.twomainlatent variables were identified one explained almost entirely by cell-cy- cle-associatedvariability(lv5)andonemainlyassociatedwiththe lt-nlt signature (lv9) (figure 4d figure s4c).despite the similarities between melanoma and control trajec- tories cells from both conditions do not completely overlap and treg cells could be ordered by nlt adaptation between popula- tions (from least to most adapted cells: control ln melanoma ln tumor and control skin) (figure 4d).the model was run allowing for 12 lvs as output and the one highly inﬂuenced by tissue-specific genes but not cell-cycle or other genes was used as a migration trajectory for both conditions (figure 4d).]
Patterns related to tissue recruitment and adaptation of Treg cells in tumor environment, shown by gene expression differences and cell distribution.

Text 315
10.1172/jci.insight.126543
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 4. mir-155 expression defines an immune-enriched phenotype in human cutaneous melanoma. (a) kaplan-meier survival curves showing an improved clinical outcome in mir-155–high subpopulation of skin cutaneous melanoma (skcm) patients (red line). for this analysis, mirseq data from the cancer genome atlas (tcga) was categorized at the top and bottom thirds, resulting in 148 patients per group. p value of the log-rank test is shown in the graph. (b) volcano plots showing differentially expressed genes in mir-155–high skcm subpopulation. this plot was generated by analyzing rnaseq data from the same patients categorized in panel a. t cell–associated genes are indicated, showing a significant upregulation in the mir-155–high cohort. a linear fit model was used and the p values were corrected using the benjamini-hochberg method. (c) comparison of the t cell–associated gene expression between mir-155–high and mir-155–low skcm subpopulations. (d) heatmap showing the correlation between mir-155 expression and skcm clinical subtype and lymphocyte infiltration scores. lymphocyte score and tumor subtype for skcm were defined in a study from tcga consortium (29). several immune-related genes showed higher levels of expression in the mir-155–high skcm subset. hierarchical clustering was performed by using euclidean distances and the ward.d2 algorithm. (e) scatter plots showing the positive correlation between mir-155 host gene (mir155hg) and immune-associated gene expression in tcga-skcm. color gradient indicates the lymphocyte infiltration score of tumors, and the symbol shape indicates the molecular subtype of tumors (▲ immune, ■ keratin, + mitf-low,  uncategorized). student’s t test was used for the statistical analysis of the slope of regression line.']. Reference sentences:[our analysis showed that higher expression of mir-155 significantly marks a subpopula- tion of patients with a favorable clinical outcome in skcm (figure 4a).several hundred genes were found to be differentially regulated in mir-155–high melanoma patients (1784 genes were upregulated and 206 genes were downregulated >2-fold with adjusted p value of < 0.05) (figure 4b).interestingly several genes associated with t cells including t cell receptor complex signal transducers (lck and lat) coreceptors (cd4 and cd8a) and effector molecules (ifng and gzmb) were also upregulated suggesting the presence of activated t cells in the tme (figure 4b).the majority of these genes exhibited more than 4-fold upregulation in mir-155–high tumors (figure 4 b and c).strikingly the mir-155–high subpopulation of patients corresponded to an immune-rich melanoma subtype as described in tcga study (figure 4d green column annotations) (29).these findings were further supported by higher lymphocyte infiltration scores in mir-155–high tumors (figure 4d dark red column annotations) as described in tcga study (29).]
Patterns of correlation between mir-155 expression and immune-related gene expression in single-cell melanoma data, indicating immune-enriched phenotype.

Text 316
10.1172/jci.insight.126543
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 5. mir-155 expression is correlated with parameters associated with immunotherapy response. (a) gsea plot showing enrichment of ifn-γ– response gene signature in mir-155–high tcga melanoma patients. normalized enrichment score (nes) and adjusted p value are shown. (b) mir-155 expression is strongly correlated with an immune signature (is) score (ock et al.; ref. 32) that predicts immunotherapy response. (c) histological assessment of 20 tcga melanoma tumor samples with the highest and lowest mir-155 expression reveals a brisk lymphocyte infiltration in the mir-155-high subset. a (–) denotes tumor sections with no appreciable immune cell presence. a (+) indicates sections in which a non-brisk and localized lymphocyte infiltrate was observed. a (++) indicates sections with brisk and widespread lymphocyte infiltration were evident. statistical comparison was performed by using χ2 test. p ≤ 0.001. (d) representative h&e–stained tumor sections used for the quantification of lymphocyte infiltration in panel c. five samples with the highest and 5 samples with the lowest mir-155 expression are shown. tcga patient identifiers for these images are as follows (in descending order of mir-155 expression): tcga-d9-a149-06a, tcga-d3-a2jh-06a, tcga-d3-a1qb-06a, tcga-d3-a51f-06a, tcga-d9-a6e9-06a, tcga-ee-a3j8-06a, tcga-yd-a89c-06a, tcga-fs-a4f0-06a, tcga-gn-a262-06a, and tcga-we-a8zm-06a. yellow arrowheads indicate lymphocyte infiltrates in the tumor. images in d are from tcga’s web interface .']. Reference sentences:[by combining these 2 approaches among 15 distinct clusters in our data set we identified 3 cd8+ t cell subsets (naive activated and activated cycling) 1 cd4+ t cell subset 3 neutrophil/granulocyte subsets (ly6a+ cxcl10+ and arg1+) 2 macrophage subsets (f4/80– and f4/80+) 4 dc subsets (cd209+ xcr1+ langerhans and plasmacytoid) and subsets of nk cells and monocytes (fig- ure 1c and supplemental figure 5).in agreement with higher ifng transcript levels we observed an enrichment of ifn-γ–response gene signature in mir-155–high tumors (figure 5a).our analysis revealed that mir-155 expression is strikingly correlated with is score in human melanoma (figure 5b).importantly when the 10 highest and 10 lowest mir-155–expressing tcga melanoma samples were examined histologically a brisk lymphocyte infiltration was evident in the mir-155–high subset (figure 5 c and d).]
Correlation between mir-155 expression and immune response signatures in single cells, reflected in lymphocyte infiltration patterns.

Text 317
10.1038/s41467-018-08247-x
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 5 validation of myeloid-derived myofibroblasts in day 12 wounds. a schematic of cell isolation from day 12 wounds in sm22-cre;tdtomato mice, sorting for tdtomato+ cells, capture by microﬂuidic device, sequencing and downstream analysis, and wound cell processing for single-cell western blot. b t-sne plot revealed heterogeneity among tdtomato+ wound cells. 116 sequenced cells were analyzed and three clusters were identified. heatmap of top differentially expressed genes is shown on the right and lyz2 is marked. c violin plots of contractile markers acta2 and tagln, pan-hematopoietic marker ptprc (aka cd45) and myeloid marker lyz2. d pearson correlation analysis between day 12 tdtomato+ cell clusters and day 12 wound fibroblasts subclusters from fig 2a. e single-cell western blot on unsorted cells from day 12 sm22-cre;tdtomato wounds revealed lyz-expressing myofibroblasts. chips were costained for lyz (green) and tdtomato (mcherry, red). graph on the right shows lyz+/tdtomato+ double-positive cells in lanes #2, #3, and #5. cell in lane #1 is single-positive for tdtomato and cell in lane #4 is double-negative. f quantification shows that ~6% of tdtomato+ wound cells co-express lyz (77 out of 1293 cells). see also supplementary figure 14. g co-staining of day 12 wounds for lyz (green) and pdgfra (red) identified occasional doublepositive fibroblasts. h co-staining of day 12 wounds for lyz (red) and sma (green) identified occasional double-positive myofibroblasts. immunostaining images shown on g and h are representative of the marker staining patterns observed in three or more independently stained samples. pw: post-wounding, facs: ﬂuorescence-activated cell sorting, rt: reverse transcription, ep: electrophoresis, qc: quality control. size bars: g, h—100 µm']. Reference sentences:[next we performed unsupervised clustering on all wound fibroblasts and observed further heterogeneity with 12 sub- clusters sc1 through sc12 (fig 2a b; supplementary figure 5) each containing unique marker gene profiles (fig 2c; supple- mentary figure 6; supplementary data 2).the ebf1high/id3high/zeb2high/en1low/nfixlow/ prrx2low/sox9off signature marked fibroblasts from sc3/9/11 sub- clusters (supplementary figure 7b c) which are hierarchically distinct (fig 2b; supplementary figure 5).next we performed scrna-seq on genetically marked contractile cells isolated from day 12 wounds of sm22-cre; tdtomato mice (fig 5a).on t-sne analysis cells segregated into three clusters—fc1 fc2 and fc3 (fig 5b) each with its distinct gene markers (supplementary figure 13; supplementary data 5).cluster fc3 had the highest correlation to sc9 subcluster (fig 5d) enriched for lyz2+/acta2+/tagln +/col12a1+ quadruple-positive myofibroblasts.consistently this cluster was also the most enriched for hematopoietic markers including pan-hematopoietic cd45 (aka ptprc) and myeloid- specific lyz2 and ccl6 (fig 5c; supplementary figure 13).to confirm lyz2+ myofibroblasts at the protein level we performed single-cell western blot on unsorted cells from day 12 sm22-cre; tdtomato wounds and stained for lyz and tdtomato (fig 5e; supplementary figure 14).indeed ~6% of tdtomato-expressing wound cells were lyz+/tdtomato+ double-positive (77 out of 1293 cells) (fig 5f).we also co-stained day 12 wounds for lyz and fibroblast markers pdgfra (fig 5g) and sma (fig 5h) and in both cases detected double-positive cells.]
Correlation patterns between myofibroblast clusters and fibroblast subclusters in day 12 wounds were identified.

Text 318
10.1016/j.cell.2019.01.017
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 3. conservation of gene co-expression modules across species and model system (a) gene co-expression relationships were determined independently in each dataset using wgcna. violin plots indicate the distribution of maximum correlation values for all co-expression modules in each pairwise comparison. (b) scatterplots depict the correlation of modules to cell types independently determined in organoid (y axis) and primary cell datasets (x axis). notably many modules correlate to coarse cell-type classifications, representing finer cell subtypes and states. dots are colored by the model system in which the network was identified. (c) network maps depict the correlation of genes from top cell type networks across all four datasets. edges represent a correlation with r > 0.25, with edge length inversely related to correlation strength. brown, orange, and red dots highlight genes that appear in the core module for 2, 3, and 4 networks respectively. see also figure s3 and tables s3, s4, and s5.']. Reference sentences:[to identify gene co-expression relationships we performed weighted gene correlation network analysis (wgcna) sepa- rately in each dataset (figure 3a).for example many modules generated in each dataset correlated with radial glia and excitatory neuron clusters while a subset correlated with intermediate progenitor and interneuron subtypes (figure 3b).these relationships al- lowed us to generate consensus modules related to cell type that emerge across all datasets (figure 3c).gene co-expression modules are preserved across model systems and organoid protocols and conserved across species relating to cell type and cell state related to figure 3 (a) heatmaps illustrate the pairwise correlation values for eigengenes representing each co-expression module across datasets and violin plots show the distribution of the percent of variance that cell type individual model system or species explain in each module.]
Patterns of gene co-expression modules across different cells, correlating to cell types and states in single-cell data.

Text 319
10.1016/j.cell.2019.01.017
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 4. organoid modules recapitulate developmental gene expression trajectories but exhibit elevated metabolic stress across protocols (a) scatterplot shows the correlation of genes to the neuronal differentiation signature as derived in organoids (y axis) and in primary cells (x axis). (b) histogram of r values indicating the correlation of the radial glia maturation network to sample age across primary radial glia (pcw8-22) and organoid radial glia (week 5–15). (c) areal identity of maturing excitatory neurons in primary tissue and across organoids as predicted by a classifier. first two columns indicate primary cells with known areal identity. (d) scatterplot shows the correlation of all gene co-expression modules to primary human cells (positive on both axes) versus organoid cells from this paper using the kadoshima protocol (negative on x axis) and a previous paper (camp et al., 2015) using a whole-brain organoid protocol (negative on y axis). modules are generated independently in each dataset and correlated to primary or organoid cell identity. glycolysis, endoplasmic-reticulum (er) stress, and electron transport modules show a strong correlation with organoid cells from both protocols. (e) violin plots illustrate the distribution of single-cell gene expression values for hub genes in the glycolysis and er stress co-expression modules from primary human and macaque cells (columns 1 and 2) organoid cells generated in this paper using the kadoshima protocol (columns 3 and 4), organoid cells generated using a whole-brain organoid protocol (columns 5 and 6; camp et al., 2015; mora-bermu´ dez et al., 2016), and a cortical spheroid protocol (column 7; sloan et al., 2017). see also figure s4.']. Reference sentences:[there- fore we used excitatory neurons from human primary visual (v1) and prefrontal cortex (pfc) to construct a classifier for areal identity (figure 4c).we used a likelihood ratio test (lrt) commonly applied to single-cell gene expression data and a general linear model to calculate differential b a c e d figure 4.]
Patterns of gene co-expression modules correlated with organoid cells, showing elevated metabolic stress, glycolysis, and ER stress across protocols.

Text 320
10.1016/j.molcel.2019.01.009
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 2. unbiased whole-transcriptome analysis of single cells with target-seq (a) unsupervised hierarchical clustering of spearman’s correlations from 180 single cells (jurkat, n = 56; set2, n = 86; and hspc, n = 38); 4,088 highly variable genes were used. scrna-seq libraries were generated with smart-seq+, mrna targeting, or target-seq as indicated. (b) tsne representation of hspcs, set2 cells, and jurkat cells from (a); the same 4,088 highly variable genes as in (a) were used. (c) number of detected genes per cell (rpkm r 1) in hspcs, set2, and jurkat cell lines from smart-seq+ or target-seq. ‘‘p’’ indicates the student’s-t-test p value, and ‘‘ns’’ = non-significance. the boxes represent median and quartiles, and the dots represent the value for each individual cell. (d) whole-transcriptome pearson’s correlation between smart-seq+ and target-seq ensembles (mean rpkm values per condition) in hspcs. the expression values for the genes targeted are highlighted. (e) pearson’s correlation between mean ercc spike-in expression values from smart-seq+ and target-seq in hspcs per ercc spike-in concentration.']. Reference sentences:[cells clustered by cell type and not by method (figures 2a and 2b) and there were no significant differences in the number of genes detected between methods (figure 2c).interestingly wt hspcs from patient if0111 who was receiving interferon treatment also showed strong ifn a b e d c figure 2.]
Patterns of correlation between gene expressions across different cell types using two different single-cell sequencing methods.

Text 321
10.1084/jem.20181444
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 6. gene expression analysis identifies up-regulation of the oas/rnasel system in duxbl transgenic dn3-4 cells. (a and b) bulk rna-seq of wt and duxblindxptαcre dn3-4 cells, performed as described in the materials and methods. (a) heat map and hierarchical clustering based on the matrix of spearman correlation across the samples of wt and tg (derived from duxblindxptαcre mice) dn3-4 cells together with wt dn3a cd27high, dn3a cd27low, and dn3b cells (using the 25% most variable genes). data were corrected for batch effects across datasets. (b) boxplots showing the normalized log2cpm of rnasel, oas1a, oas1b, oas1c, oas1g, oas2, oas3, oasl1, and oasl2 in wt and tg (derived from duxblindxptαcre mice) dn3-4 cells. log2 fc and false discovery rate (fdr) are indicated for each gene. (c) relative expression of rnasel, oas1a, oas1b, oas2, oas3, and oasl1 in wt dn2, dn3a, dn3b, and dn4 cells. as housekeeping gene, β-actin was used. data were collected from four independent experiments. statistical analysis was done with two-tailed unpaired student’s t test. , p < 0.05; , p < 0.01; , p < 0.001, ns, not significant. error bars indicate standard deviation (b) or standard error of the mean (c).']. Reference sentences:[comparison of these two populations with the previous rna-seq data re- vealed a close similarity between wt dn3-4 cells and dn3b cells (fig 6 a) which is expected since at the level of surface protein expression they differ only slightly in their cd25 expression.qpcr analysis of the expression of different oas genes as well as of the rnasel gene during t cell development revealed that some such as rnasel and oas1b are specifically up-regulated at the dn3a stage (fig 6 c).even more striking was the silencing of all oas/rnasel genes in dn3b cells after β-selection passage (fig 6 c).since our figure 6.]
Summary: Correlation patterns of up-regulated oas/rnasel system genes in transgenic dn3-4 cells compared to wt cells.

Text 322
10.1172/jci.insight.124574
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 5. pseudotime scores and related genes associated with atherosclerosis progression and regression. (a) we used pc1 scores as a pseudotime measure and show shifted distributions of progression and regression cells. (b) heatmap of genes identified to be significantly correlated with the pseudotime score. (c) we identified 53 genes significantly correlated with the pseudotime score that are negatively associated (r = –0.347, p = 0.01103) with merged gene expression log2 (polyi:c/saline) values from a previous atherosclerosis regression/progression study (38).']. Reference sentences:[while overlapping the distributions were clearly shifted (figure 5a).we screened for genes whose cell-specific expression levels were correlated or anti-correlated with the cell-specific pseudotime values; this unsupervised analysis yielded 42 genes whose increased expression levels were associated with regression and 7 genes whose expression levels were associated with progression (figure 5b).ctsb and ctsd (37) are associated with regression and have not been linked previously to m2 macrophage features (figure 4e and figure 5b).we found significant anticorrelation (figure 5c) (p = 0.01 r = –0.35) as expected since progressing cells have higher mean pseudotime than regressing cells (figure 5a).the expression profile of stem-like macrophages hierarchical- ly clustered with myeloid progenitors (mlps) and stem cells indicating that they may have self-renewing properties consistent with the expression of cell cycle genes (figure 6d and supplemental figure 5).while macrophages char- acteristic of the m1 (classically activated) and m2 (alternatively activated inflammation resolving) polarization extremes have been found by immunohistochemical markers in human and murine plaques (47) only recently figure 5.]
Patterns of gene expression correlated with pseudotime scores in atherosclerosis progression and regression cells.

Text 323
10.1172/jci.insight.124574
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 7. validation of the presence of a “stem-like” cell cluster from an independent study of atherosclerotic mice. a recently published single-cell data set from kim et al. (ref. 40; “kim”) from sorted cd45+ cells isolated from whole aortas of ldlr–/– mice fed wd for 12 weeks was combined with our progression and regression data sets (lin progression, lin regression) with seurat merging and aligned with canonical correlation analysis (cca). (a) t-sne visualization of the 8906 single cells from both data sets after louvain clustering and colored by sub-cluster.(b) singler method was used for unbiased cell classifications of each sub-cluster against the immgen database and colored and labeled accordingly on the t-sne plot. (c) t-sne plot colored based on experimental group and data sets, showing that cluster 6 includes cells from all 3 experiments. (d) cluster composition by cell numbers of experimental groups and data sets (red, kim ldlr–/–; green, lin progression; blue, lin regression) in total single cells. (e) violin plot and heatmap showing the highest expression of cell cycle (“stemness”) genes in cluster 6. (f) violin plot and heatmap showing the expression of cx3cr1 in cluster 6.']. Reference sentences:[gene ontology analysis confirmed that “cell division” is an important pathway for this population of cells (supple- mental figure 7).we performed mergeseurat aligned the data sets with canonical correlation analysis (cca) and identified 11 clusters by louvain clustering (figure 7a).we then classified the cell populations with single cell recognition (singler) a novel method for unbiased cell type recognition (41) and identified specific cell clusters as macrophages monocytes dcs and innate lymphoid cells (ilcs) (figure 7b).most of the cells in the merged data set were classified as macrophages by singler and we identified a distinct macrophage cluster (cluster 6) that expressed the highest level of cell cycle genes and thus exhib- ited stem-like properties (figure 7 b–e).notably this cell cluster was present in a similar proportion (3.4%) in total sequenced cells (figure 7d) from each data set (i.e. both progression and regression samples and kim et al.’s data set) demonstrating that the abundance of this cell cluster is consistent in the different atherosclerosis models and settings.we also confirmed that most of the cells in this cluster maintained high expression of cx3cr1 (figure 7f).while macrophages with m2 features (cell surface expression of pd-l2 and cd301 and increased mrc1 expression) were more abundant during regression (figure 1 d–f figure 2 and figure 3) a dis- tinct cluster of macrophages (retnlahiear2hi macrophages) expressing m2 signature genes was present in figure 7.]
Summary: Cluster 6 exhibits high expression of cell cycle genes, indicating stem-like properties, and consistent expression of cx3cr1.

Text 324
10.1038/s41586-019-0942-8
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 3 | transcriptomic and proteomic analyses of insulin-producing human α-cells. a, b, principal component (pc; a) and pearson correlation (b) analyses of rna-seq samples, showing a gene signature shift from α- to β-cells. each dot in a represents one donor. c, volcano plot representing degs in sorted β-cells relative to sorted α-cells (false discovery rate (fdr) < 0.05, fold change (fc) in gene expression > 2). in total, 887 α-cell-enriched genes and 587 β-cell-enriched genes were identified (supplementary table 10). d–f, volcano plots showing degs in αgfp pseudoislets relative to sorted α-cells, characterizing the cell aggregation effect (d), αpm relative to αgfp pseudoislets, reflecting the effect of pdx1 and mafa overexpression (e), and αpm pseudoislets relative to sorted α-cells, reflecting the combined effect of reaggregation and pdx1 and mafa overexpression (f). upregulated degs in each condition (coloured squares in d–f) were overlapped with β-cell-enriched genes from c, as a measure of β-cell trait acquisition. the venn diagrams']. Reference sentences:[)) whereas the combination of pdx1 and mafa (αpm pseudoislets) triggered the highest repro- gramming efficiency (38.3 ± 5.0%; fig 1c d; extended data fig 3a b).αpm cells cultured as single cells displayed a much lower reprogramming frequency (3.9%) ex vivo or in vivo after transplantation (fig 1e; extended data fig 3e; data not shown).similar to β-cells α-cells aggregated faster into pseudoislets in the presence of hm cells (+hm) although reprogramming frequency remained unchanged (fig 1e and extended data fig 3f–h).apoptosis and proliferation were rare (extended data fig 3i j).d immunofluorescence of two pseudoislets made of α-cells transduced with gfp (αgfp) or gfp and pdx1 + mafa (αpm) (see extended data fig 3a).principal component and correlation analyses revealed that αpm cells display a signature that is intermediate between α- and β-cells further shifted towards that of β-cells after transplantation into mice (fig 3a b).in total 587 degs were more abun- dant in sorted β-cells than in α-cells; we termed these ‘β-cell-related’ genes (fig 3c supplementary table 10) and measured how they were modulated in α-cells after aggregation or coexpression of pdx1 and mafa (aggregation or pm effect respectively).cell aggregation led to the upregulation in α-cells of 128 β-related genes (out of 587) (fig 3d; supplementary table 11) indicating that mere aggregation is suffi- cient to impose functional aspects of the β-cell signature.there were 115 upregulated β-related genes in αpm comprising important functional β-cell markers such as ins mafa (endogenous) psck1 adcyap131 pfkfb232 rbp133 and six334 (fig 3e; supplementary table 12).finally we evaluated the overall effect of combined aggre- gation and the pdx1 and mafa effect by comparing αpm pseudois- lets with sorted α-cells: in this comparison 268 β-related genes were upregulated in αpm pseudoislets including iapp and glp1r (fig 3f; supplementary table 13).gene sets such as ‘hallmark β-cells’ and ‘reg- ulation of insulin secretion’ were also enriched (fig 3g; extended data fig 8d).consistent with this the expression of arx remained invariable in reprogrammed α-cells incidentally confirming that gsis is compatible with arx activity (extended data fig 3d).several functional β-cell proteins were upregulated such as ins pcsk1 pfkfb2 rbp1 adcyap1 uchl1 abcc8 entpd3 and iapp (fig 3h; supplementary table 19).article research extended data fig 3 | see next page for caption.article research extended data fig 3 | assessment of the effect of transcription factor expression on insulin production in human α-cells.3: dt + αpm fig 3b) shows that endogenous mouse β-cells were well-ablated and did not regenerate suggesting improvement of diabetic symptoms was dependent on the human αpm graft.l body weight changes in experimental animals of fig 3b (exp.m n ipgtt at 7 weeks after transplantation (related to fig 3b–d) shows significantly improved glucose tolerance in both dt + αpm and dt + islets groups.groups are indicated by coloured lines as in fig 3b c. n = 3 for dt + islets n = 1 for dt + αpm n = 5 for dt + no graft and n = 5 for no dt + no graft (l m).d heatmaps of transcriptomic expression levels of gene sets in αpm pseudoislets and sorted α-cells (related to gsea in fig 3g).]
Patterns related to correlation between gene expression profiles of α-cells and β-cells, influenced by cell aggregation and transcription factor overexpression.

Text 325
10.1016/j.cell.2019.01.031
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 6. dysregulated transcriptional programs in malignant progenitors (a) scatterplot positions genes (dots) by their preferential expression in malignant hsc/prog-like cells relative to normal counterparts (x axis), and by their correlation to hsc/prog prediction scores across malignant cells (y axis). genes in the top right are preferentially expressed in malignant hsc/prog-like cells, relative to normal progenitors and other malignant cell types (red). (b) heatmap shows expression of surface markers (rows) in normal bm cells (left, columns) or malignant cells from diagnostic aml aspirates (right, columns). cd14 is shown for comparison. p values between hsc-like cells and normal hscs are calculated by fdr-adjusted kruskal test. (c) heatmaps show expression of normal bm-derived signature genes for hsc/prog, gmp, or differentiated myeloid cells (n = 90; rows) in normal bm (left, columns) or malignant aml cells (right, columns). cells are ordered by their classifier prediction scores (shown on top). cells that express cell-cycle genes are indicated. primitive aml cells co-express hsc/prog and gmp programs.']. Reference sentences:[the signatures were anti-correlated across the bulk expression profiles (r = =0.24; figure 6e) sup- porting the observation that the developmental states of primitive aml cells vary between tumors.we used a paired wilcoxon test to compare correlations of gene expression to pre- diction scores (figure 6d).combining these signatures resulted in a greater survival difference (figure 6f).]
Summary: Correlation between gene expression and prediction scores in malignant cells, with preferential expression in specific cell types and co-expression of developmental programs.

Text 326
10.1016/j.celrep.2019.02.031
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 1. single-cell transcriptomic profiling of pregastrula mouse embryos and cell lineage identification (a) sampling of single cells from pregastrula embryos, cdna library preparation, quality assessment, and rna-sequencing using the smart-seq2 protocol. (b) left: summary of the single-cell samples showing the number of cells captured, after quality-control filtering, from groups of embryos of different genotype, age, and sex (f, female; m, male). right: number of detected genes (rpkm, r1) per cell, and spearman correlation to the nearest cell using all cell pairs and genes. (c) left: projection of all cells (n = 1724) onto two principal dimensions using t-sne based on the 3,000 most variable genes. right: expression of representative cell-lineage specific marker genes of cells displayed in the t-sne plot; pou5f1 for the epiblast (epi), bmp4 for the extraembryonic ectoderm (exe), and amn for the visceral endoderm (ve). (d) heatmap of the top 20 degs that were expressed in more than 50% of cells in each lineage. (e) go term enrichment analysis using the 200 top degs. see also figure s1 and table s1.']. Reference sentences:[after quality assessment 1724 cells from 28 embryos were retained with an average of 8577 expressed genes per cell (reads per kilobase of transcript per million mapped reads [rpkm] r1) and average spearman correlation of 0.84 (figure 1b).using the 3000 most variable genes t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding (t-sne) analysis has identified three major clusters (figure 1c; similar clustering was found using either 2000 or 5000 most variable genes figure s1a).in contrast to cell populations in the preim- plantation embryo that segregated across developmental time (deng et al. 2014) embryonic cells were clustered by cell line- ages that were anchored by marker genes e.g. pou5f1 for epi (768 cells) bmp4 for the extraembryonic ectoderm (exe; 285 cells) and amn for the ve (671 cells) (figure 1c).the heatmap displayed the top 20 lineage- specific markers that were expressed in at least 50% of the cells in each lineage (figure 1d; table s1).gene ontology (go) analysis of the top 200 differentially ex- pressed genes (degs) of each lineage revealed enriched go functions such as pattern specification and gastrulation for the epi; placental development regulation of vasculature develop- ment and lipid transport for exe; and lipid localization for ve (figure 1e).a b c d e figure 1.]
Patterns of correlation between gene expressions in different cell lineages across single cells from pregastrula mouse embryos.

Text 327
10.1016/j.celrep.2019.02.031
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 4. spatially defined molecular features and gene expression in the epi (a) the venn diagram showing the degs between the anterior and transition epi states at four embryonic ages. (b) display of the pattern of degs between the anterior and posterior states along the spatial trajectory. the transition state epi cells expressed both the anterior and posterior degs at comparable levels. (c) the expression levels (dot size) and expression variability (extra-poisson variability) (color scale) of the top 10 degs in epi cells of anterior and posterior states. (d) heatmap showing the expression of top 20 degs in the anterior, transition and posterior states, respectively. genes are ordered by fold changes and expression levels are normalized by z-score. (e) the mapping of each epi state by degs to the equivalent populations in the epiblast, displayed as the corn plot by geo-seq. corn plots: color scale indicates the level of gene expression computed from transcript counts in the rna-seq dataset. boxes in the corn plots indicate the partition of the epi into three regions. graphical data: pearson correlation coefficient of gene expression between degs in three epi clusters with the corresponding regions computed with geo-seq. see also figures s3 and s4 and tables s4, s5, s6, and s7.']. Reference sentences:[venn diagram showed how degs evolved with a large difference found at e5.5 (1902 degs) and e6.25 (1204 degs) (figure 4a; table s4) which suggested that transition epi was preparing for cell cell reports 26 2593–2607 march 5 2019 2597 a e g h f b c d i figure 3.we showed that anterior marker genes were gradually downregulated whereas posterior marker genes were upregulated along the pseudospace trajec- tory (figure 4b).more importantly transition epi showed rela- tively similar expression of these markers but switched from slightly higher expression of anterior marker to posterior marker at one spatial point (figure 4b).for the top 10 anterior and poste- rior markers among three epi states the transition cells showed a weak but comparable level of expression of these 20 markers with higher variability indicating the fate switching (figure 4c).2017) and the remodeling of the extra- cellular matrix and regulation of g1-s cell-cycle transition in esc differentiation such as spp1 and dppa2 (du et al. 2010; kalkan et al. 2017) were enriched in the anterior state (figure 4d).because the posterior state was represented mainly among epi cells of e6.5 embryos (figures 3b and 3c) we validated the positional profile of gene expression with geo-seq data of e6.5 epi (figure 4e; table s7).based on the preponderance of three epi states in total e6.5 cells (figure 3c) geo-seq data of e6.5 3a–7a regions were used to validate the anterior genes and e6.5 2a–5p regions were used to validate the transition genes (figure 4e corn plots).top-ranked genes in the anterior (aire and fam25c) and the posterior state (klhl6 and aplnr) were mapped to cells in the anterior and the posterior regions of the e6.5 epiblast respectively whereas those of the transition marker (trh and ntrk2) were mapped to populations in between the anterior and posterior regions (corn plots figure 4e).cell reports 26 2593–2607 march 5 2019 2599 a d e b c figure 4.]
Summary: Correlation of gene expression patterns between different cell clusters in the single-cell transcriptomics data.

Text 328
10.1016/j.celrep.2019.02.031
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 2. transcriptional program associated with wnt3 expression in the epi (a–c) t-sne visualization of the expression pattern of the selected genes in 768 epi cells of e5.25, e5.5, e6.25, and e6.5 embryos. (a) the expression of wnt3 across all epi cells showing the increasing level toward one pole of the cluster, (b) the co-expression of wnt3 and t (brachyury), heralding the emergence of the primitive streak at e6.5, and (c) the differential expression of wnt3 versus dppa4. symbols: e5.25 to e6.5; two-dimension color scale: level of expression of wnt3 and gene x (t or dppa4). (d) heatmap of the top 20 genes that were positively or negatively correlated with wnt3. the epi cells are ordered according to the expression level of wnt3 from low (left) to high (right). cells with zero expression are ordered by embryonic age. (e and f) the mean expression levels over time of genes that are positively (e) and negatively (f) correlated with wnt3 expression. the size of the dots denotes the proportion of cells expressing the gene (rpkm, r1) at each embryonic age. see also figure s2 and table s2.']. Reference sentences:[t (brachyury) a direct target of wnt3 showed a similar expression distribution as wnt3 but was detected later than wnt3 and more highly expressed and restricted to a small 2594 cell reports 26 2593–2607 march 5 2019 subset of e6.5 wnt3-expressing epi cells (figure 2b).the expression pattern of the pluripotency-related gene dppa4 was complementary to that of wnt3 with enriched expression in the epi cells that were not expressing wnt3 (figure 2c).among the top genes positively correlated with wnt3 were the primitive streak markers such as mixl1 t frzb and eomes (figure 2d).in contrast primed pluripotency genes such as a b c d f e figure 2.2596 cell reports 26 2593–2607 march 5 2019 dnmt3a utf1 and pou3f1 were the top three negatively corre- lated genes expressed in the majority of epi cells (figure 2d).]
Patterns of gene expression correlated with wnt3 levels in epi cells, including primitive streak markers and pluripotency genes.

Text 329
10.1126/sciimmunol.aav5581
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 6. trm-like subsets exhibit quantitative gene expression differences in donor and recipient t cells and are consistent between patients. (a) heat map of the z-scored mean expression values (as defined in fig 5d) of select genes based on differential expression analysis in each cluster, with cluster 1 designated as mature trm, cluster 2 designated as tem, and cluster 3 designated as trm-like. (b) volcano plots showing differential gene expression in donor compared with recipient t cells in each cluster. (c) pc clustering from scrna-seq analysis of cd3+ t cells obtained from the bal of p19 13 months after transplantation identifies two distinct clusters, demarcated by color; tsne plots visualizing cluster differentiation. (d) pearson correlation analysis comparing gene expression within clusters 1, 2, and 3 from patient p29 to gene expression within clusters 1 and 2 from patient p19.']. Reference sentences:[to determine significant differential gene expression in the clusters we plotted the average gene expression between clusters onto a new heat map (fig 6a).to assess heterogeneity within each cluster we fur- ther compared gene expression between donor- and recipient-derived t cells within each cluster (fig 6b).volcano plots show a greater con- cordance of gene expression between donor and recipient t cells with- in cluster 1 (mature trm) with a low magnitude of differential gene expression compared with higher magnitude of gene expression dif- ferences between donor and recipient t cells within clusters 2 and 3 (fig 6b).the data resolved into two clusters by t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding (tsne) analysis (fig 6c) similar to the trm-like clusters we identified for p29.cluster 1 in p19 with high cd69/cd103 expression strongly correlated with p29 cluster 1 (fig 6 c and d and fig s4b).similarly cluster 2 for p19 correlated with cluster 3 for p29 representing a distinct trm population (fig 6d).cluster 2 from p29 representing the tissue- infiltrating tem population was not identified in p19 (fig 6d) likely due to the low number of recipient t cells.]
Patterns of gene expression correlation within and between clusters of T cells from different patients.

Text 330
10.1016/j.celrep.2019.02.043
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 7. mau2-nipbl and nua4/tip60 complex are insulin regulators (a) fold change of ins1 and ins2 genes in mouse min6 cells after crispr deletion of mau2 and nipbl. expression levels are normalized to control sgrna. p < 0.01; p < 0.05, t test. (b) min6 cells chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing (chip-seq) data with h3k4me3, h3k27ac, mau2, and nipbl at ins1 and ins2 loci. (c) drop-seq demonstrates b-cell-specific expression of the mau2 gene. (d) correlation between human mau2 and ins gene in the gtex cohort of 171 human pancreas tissue. (e) gsis is measured by the fold change of extracellular insulin levels between low glucose and high glucose challenge: human islet (1.6 mm/ 16.6 mm); min6 (1.25 mm/25 mm). the cells were pretreated with dmso, 5 nm nu9056, or 1 mm acetate for 24 h as indicated. (f) elisa quantification of intracellular insulin levels in crispr knockout min6 cells. gray, control sgrnas; orange, positive regulators; blue, negative regulators. (g) insulin secretion from min6 knockout cells are measured as fraction of total intracellular insulin levels. (h) gsis are computed as secreted insulin levels between low and high glucose conditions (2.5 mm/25 mm). all error bars in this figure are sd from triplicated assays.']. Reference sentences:[the b cell functions of these two complexes are unknown so we performed additional analyses to gain further insights into the underlying mechanisms (figure 7).our single-cell data demonstrated that in human islets mau2 is expressed at higher levels in b cells than in other cell types (figure 7c).interestingly from the 171 human pancreas samples collected by the genotype-tissue expression (gtex) project (gtex consortium 2015) we found a significant positive correlation between the transcription of mau2 and ins gene (figure 7d).interestingly the baseline insulin secretion from mau2 and nipbl knockout cells increased (figure 7g); the reason remains elusive because knocking out these two proteins may cause widespread effects on gene transcription genome architecture and cell cycle.a c d b e f g h figure 7.]
Correlation between mau2 and ins gene expressions in single cells, with specific focus on insulin regulation.

Text 331
10.1242/dev.173740
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig s1. separation of cell states within mounds. relates to fig 1. (a) patterns of correlation within lineage specific genes. correlation heatmaps, split into prespore and prestalk genes, are shown for 0, 3, 6 and 14h timepoints. we selected cell-type specific genes from the data of parikh et al (2010) with |log2fc| > 1, fdr < 0.01 and an expression level of at least 100 normalised read counts, in at least one cell. these data relate to fig 1b but with a more stringent cut off. (b) subpopulations during dictyostelium development, identified by pca of single cells transcriptomes collected at four developmental timepoints (0, 3, 6 and 14 h). each dot is a cell, coloured by the level of expression of pspa (left panel) or ecma (right panel). the same data are plotted in fig 1c. note that strong expression of pspa and ecma labels the same cluster, indicating cell fate is not the major source of heterogeneity in the mound, necessitating a focussed view on the symmetrybreaking population (14h) alone.']. Reference sentences:[]
Summary: Correlation patterns within lineage-specific genes in single cells at different timepoints during development. Subpopulations identified by PCA based on gene expression levels.

Text 332
10.1126/science.aaw1219
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 3. identification of variation in cerebellar gene expression by slide-seq. (a) heatmap illustrating the separation of purkinje-expressed genes into two clusters by spatial gene correlation. the i,jth entry is the number of genes found to overlap with both genes i and j in the purkinje cluster (7). (b) for genes with significant expression (p < 0.001, fisher exact test) in the nodulus-uvula region (7), the']. Reference sentences:[using the spatial information collected by slide-seq we identified 669 spatially non- random genes in the purkinje layer (table s2) of which 126 appeared either correlated or anti- correlated with the zebrin pattern using aldoc and plcb4 as markers of zebrin ii–positive or zebrin ii–negative bands respectively (fig 3a).whereas most of the identified genes displayed a pattern consistent with zebrin ii staining (fig 3 b and c) several were ex- clusively expressed in or excluded from the vestibulocerebellar region (lobules ix and x) (21 22) (fig 3d and table s2) confirming that lobules ix and x have a distinct program of gene expression.aldoc genes plcb4 genes c a 0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0 0.02 0.04 0.06 0.08 0.1 0.12 0.14 hspb1 fraction in nodulus-uvula fraction in vi/vii prkci irs2 prkcd ngdn aldoc uchl1 ccdc23 prpf31 cck stmn4 kctd12 car7 b d fig 3.]
Spatial gene correlation patterns in purkinje layer cells, with some genes showing correlation or anti-correlation with zebrin patterns.

Text 333
10.1038/s41590-019-0346-9
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 6 | treg cell-derived il-10 and il-35 regulate cd8+ tils through blimp1-inhibitory receptor axis. a–e. data averaged from five independent rnaseq experiments: foxp3cre-yfp (n=3), il10l/l.foxp3cre-yfp (n=2), ebi3l/l-tom.foxp3cre-yfp (n=3) and il10 l/l.ebi3l/l-tom.foxp3cre-yfp cd8s (n=4). a, the gating strategy for double-sorted cd8+ subsets for rnaseq (pd-1negtim3–, neg; pd-1inttim3–, int; pd-1hitim3–, sp and pd-1hitim3+, dp). pca plot depicting the ndln and cd8+ tils subsets from foxp3cre-yfp mice. each symbol represents an independently sequenced replicate. b, heat map of the tumor-exhaustion gene signature mapped to the chronic lcmv exhaustion signature program, representing the ndln and cd8+ til subsets from b16-tumor-bearing foxp3cre-yfp mice. c, gsea of tumor-exhaustion gene signature derived from sp (left) and dp (right) subsets of foxp3cre-yfp mice; p values as indicated. d, the xy plots representing the differentially expressed transcription factors in sp subsets. the x axis represents differentially expressed genes in the pd-1hi (sp and dp) subsets relative to neg subsets from control foxp3cre-yfp mice; the y axis represents differentially expressed genes in the treg cell cytokine-deficient environments relative to control foxp3cre-yfp counterparts. only significantly changed transcription factors are listed. we only considered transcription factors that were differentially expressed in exhausted cells (pd-1hi, dp and sp) with a minimum log2 fold change of 1.5, which was further filtered for ones that were differentially expressed across genotypes in the sp subset with the same cutoffs. e, gsea of the blimp1 associated gene signature in sp (left) and dp (right) subsets of foxp3cre-yfp mice; p values as indicated. c,e, statistical significance was determined by the ‘ranksumtestwithcorrelation’ test in the limma r package with correction for loss in degrees of freedom due to correlation among genes. all p values are two sided. no correction for multiple hypotheses was performed. f, representative histograms for validation of blimp1 and its associated gene (tcf-1 and il-7r) at the protein level in the cd8+ tils from b16 tumor-bearing foxp3cre-yfp (n=6), il10l/l.foxp3cre-yfp (n=4), ebi3l/l-tom.foxp3cre-yfp (n=5) and il10l/l.ebi3l/l-tom.foxp3cre-yfp (n=6) mice from two independent experiments. g, scatter-bar plots tabulating the expression levels of blimp1, il-7r and tcf-1 as in f. statistical significance was determined by one-way anova with holm–sidak multiple comparisons (p<0.0001 and other p values as indicated).']. Reference sentences:[we performed rnaseq with cd8+ til subsets on the basis of the expression of pd-1 and tim3: (1) pd-1hitim3+ dp (2) pd-1hitim3– sp (3) pd-1int and (4) pd-1neg t cell subsets (fig 6a and supplementary fig 6a).pca of these subsets from con- trol foxp3cre-yfp mice segregated them into defined clusters on the basis of location (ndln versus til) and state of exhaustion (neg int sp versus dp) highlighting the distinct transcriptional signa- tures specific to each subset (fig 6ab).differential gene expression analysis comparing the cd8+ til subsets from single and dual treg cell cytokine-deficient mice to corresponding wild-type counter- parts revealed that the alteration of the tme by treg cell-restricted deletion of il-10 and/or il-35 influenced the transcriptome of all the cd8+ subsets (supplementary fig 6b–d).foxp3cre-yfp ebi3l/l-tom.foxp3cre-yfp and il10l/l.ebi3l/l-tom.foxp3cre-yfp mice relative to the control cd8+ t cells (fig 6c).this exhaus- tion gene signature of cd8+ til subsets displayed strong congru- ence to the published data from lcmv infection28 indicative of a core molecular program that drives pd-1int to pd-1hi transition in chronic settings (supplementary fig 6e).these results further sup- port the ability of both il-10+ and il-35+ treg cell subpopulations to drive the pd-1int to pd-1hi transition thereby promoting the multi- inhibitory receptor+ til state (fig 6c).the transcription factor prdm1 (encoding blimp1) was one of the top genes induced during this transition and was signifi- cantly reduced in sp and dp cd8+ t cells from il10l/l.foxp3cre-yfp ebi3l/l-tom.foxp3cre-yfp and il10l/l.ebi3l/l-tom.foxp3cre-yfp mice (fig 6d).reduced prdm1 expression was accompanied by an upreg- ulation of its target genes (many of which are characteristic of mem- ory t cells: tcf7 id3 il7r)29 (fig 6d–g) which is in agreement with an increase in cd8+ central memory t cells (tcm) (fig 4c).we also noted upregulation of a pd-1 blockade-responsive tcf-1+cxcr5+ memory gene signature30 in cd8+ t cells from il10l/l.foxp3cre-yfp ebi3l/l-tom.foxp3cre-yfp and il10l/l.ebi3l/l-tom.foxp3cre-yfp mice (supplementary fig 6f).]
Correlation patterns between exhaustion gene signatures and transcription factors in CD8+ TIL subsets influenced by Treg cell cytokine deficiency.

Text 334
10.1038/s41586-019-1127-1
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 4 | anterior–posterior pseudo-spatial axis of cells that reside within the gut tube at e8.75. a–c, e, force-directed layout of e8.75 visceral and definitive endoderm cells that combines anterior and posterior cells with afp–gfp-positive and afp–gfp-negative cells, using mnncorrect18. a, cells coloured based on measured or inferred anterior–posterior position. b, inferred anterior–posterior (ap) pseudo-space (left) and proportion of visceral and definitive endoderm cells in bins along the anterior–posterior pseudo-space (right). purple dots represent correlation']. Reference sentences:[following application of harmony to e3.5 and e4.5 datasets force-directed layout illustrates the relationship between blastocyst lin- eages (extended data fig 4a b).on the basis of the average diffusion distance1011 from the bipotent inner cell mass (icm) trophectoderm cells were substantially further away from icm than either epi or pre (extended data fig 4b methods).this suggests that the decision between trophectoderm and icm is complete before icm cells make a choice between pre and epi and that epi cells are phenotypically closer to icm cells than they are to pre cells (extended data fig 4c).to pinpoint the time point at which fate decisions occur and to char- acterize gene expression dynamics during commitment we excluded trophectoderm cells and applied palantir1011 using a nanoghigh cell (uncommitted icm) as the start cell (extended data fig 4d e).the changes in differentiation potential and branch probabilities suggest that the icm lineage divergence into epi and pre occurs at e3.5 con- sistent with previous analyses that used limited markers2021 (extended data fig 4e f).two icm clusters were identified: one cluster repre- sented uncommitted cells that had an equal propensity for pre and epi fate (purple in extended data fig 4d g h) and another cluster— although uncommitted—had started to specify towards pre or epi (green in extended data fig 4d g h supplementary table 1).we also identified two pre clusters at e3.5 which we propose represent nascent (light blue in extended data fig 4d) and more advanced (dark blue in extended data fig 4d) populations during lineage maturation22.two clusters were identified within the pre at e4.5 (clusters shown in light and dark blue in extended data fig 4d i) that probably represent emergent visceral and parietal endoderm (orange and black arrowheads respec- tively in extended data fig 4d i supplementary table 2).investigation of gene trends within the epi and visceral endoderm (supplementary fig 4) identified genes that correlate with endoderm factors (such as foxa2 gata4 gata6 sox7 and sox17) as well as pluripotency-associated factors (such as nanog pou3f1 and klf4) (supplementary table 3).to define the crossover between epi and visceral endoderm we applied palantir to harmony-augmented data from cells at e3.5–e5.5 after excluding trophectoderm and exe cells (fig 2b) and using the same nanoghigh start cell as in extended data fig 4.anterior–posterior patterning of gut endoderm we combined data from anterior and posterior gut tube compart- ments at e8.75 with gfp-positive and gfp-negative populations (fig 4a) using a manifold classifier (supplementary note 3) to infer the gfp status of anterior and posterior cells and the anterior– posterior position of gfp-positive and gfp-negative cells (extended data fig 8a b).to determine a more robust ordering we inferred pseudo-spatial ordering of cells along the gut tube by com- puting multiscale distances from the anterior-most cell after project- ing cells onto multiple diffusion components (fig 4b extended data fig 8d supplementary note 4).consistent with previous findings we observed extensive intermixing of these descendants along the anterior–posterior pseudo-space axis with enrichment of definitive endoderm descend- ants in the anterior and visceral endoderm descendants in the posterior region (fig 4b).all genes were expressed at substantial levels in both visceral and definitive endoderm cells and at comparable anterior–posterior positions—except for nkx2-1 which is expressed in the anterior-most cells of the gut tube and is therefore exclusive to the definitive endoderm (fig 4c).we applied this classifier (trained on data from e7.5 cells) to predict the origin of cells within the gut tube at e8.75 and achieved a similarly high accuracy (fig 4d auroc 0.92).thus despite the extensive morphological and transcrip- tional changes that take place between e7.5 and e8.75 visceral endo- derm lineage history is maintained through the expression of a core set of genes including rhox5 trap1a xlr3a cdkn2a and ttr (fig 4e extended data fig 8i j supplementary table 5).to quantify the distribution of visceral and definitive endoderm cells within embryo gut tubes at e8.75 (13 somite stage) at cellular resolution we analysed serial transverse sec- tions of three afp-gfptg/+ embryos (fig 4f extended data fig 8l).covariance matrices were computed separately for the putative e5.5 emve (449 cells) and exve cells (618 cells) using the 2500 most-variable genes which were also used for characterizing visceral endoderm developmental trajectories with palantir (fig 4a).visceral endoderm cells in fig 4 were used for testing robustness.article research extended data fig 4 | lineage decisions in the mammalian blastocyst.]
Summary: Anterior-posterior patterns of gut tube cells at e8.75, with definitive endoderm in the anterior and visceral endoderm in the posterior, showing correlation.

Text 335
10.1016/j.immuni.2019.03.009
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 2. immune cell types show orthologous gene expression between mouse and human at the level of major lineages (a and b) enriched genes within major immune cell types in (a) human and (b) mouse samples. tpmref, second-highest expression value per gene transcripts per million. (c) hierarchical clustering of major cell lineages groups the cells by cell type rather than by organism. cell-type labels are as in figures 1c and 1d; cell types were clustered using gene expression correlation. (d) heatmap showing gene orthologs similarly enriched within mouse and human immune cell types. tpmref, median expression value per gene, transcripts per million. see also figure s2.']. Reference sentences:[this could be seen by clustering the cell types by their gene expres- sion (correlation distance) (figure 2c) and by inspection of the expression of cell-type-specific genes across cell types in both species (figure 2d).a b c d figure 2.tpmref defined as in figure 2a.tpmref defined as in figure 2d.tpmref defined as in figure 2a.tpmref defined as in figure 2d.tpmref defined as in figure 2a.tpmref defined as in figure 2d.color bar is as in figure 2a.tpmref defined as in figure 2d. for figure 2a steps 1 and 2 were omitted i.e. no selection on variability was performed and all 1-to-1 orthologs detected in at least one mouse and one human subset were included.]
Summary: Gene expression correlation patterns between major immune cell types in mouse and human single-cell data.

Text 336
10.1016/j.stem.2019.03.006
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 5. cellular heterogeneity of murine malignant gliomas revealed by scrna-seq (a) h&e staining showing the malignant glioblastoma tissue (arrow) at dpi 35. scale bar: 1 mm. (b) t-sne analysis of single cells from glioma core tissues at dpi 35. (c) (left) comparison of opc-like cells with human gbm subtypes based on tcga datasets. (right) distributions of subtype scores are shown. (d) heatmap of mouse glioma cell clusters (excluding immune and endothelial cells). selected marker genes are displayed on the right. (e) pearson’s correlation coefficient between normal and tumor cell populations. (f) the proportions of distinct identified clusters in single-cell data from glioblastoma. (g) distributions of the pri-opc scores across pri-opc-like cells from tumors and opc populations in normal cells. (h) the ratio of opc and cop-like to pri-opc-like cells in pdgfra, hgfap-gfp+, and tumor scrna-seq pools. (i) venn diagram depicting the intersection of top 100 marker genes (ranked by p value) in pri-opc-like subpopulations between pdgfra-gfp and tumor datasets. (j) gene ontology analysis of unique genes showing p value (àlog10) and representative terms. p < 0.001; one-way anova with post hoc tukey’s test. see also figure s4 and tables s2 and s3.']. Reference sentences:[brain tumors formed around 3 weeks after ste- reotaxic delivery of dn-p53-pdgfb retroviruses into the cortical white matter at a gliogenic stage p2 (figure 5a).the pri- opc-like cells scored highly for the proneural gbm gene signa- ture but low for neural classical and mesenchymal signatures (verhaak et al. 2010; figure 5c).the subclustering for neural cell types identified cellular characteristics that parallel that of the normal neonatal cortex including astrocyte-like igc-like cop-like pri-opc-like cycling opc (g1/s and g2/m) ependy- mal cells and cell populations unique to tumor cells with stress and hypoxia signatures (figure 5d).a population of cells in the tumor tissues exhibited a stronger similarity of expression patterns to pri-opcs than normal opcs or iols in the developing cortex (figure 5e).these ‘‘pri-opc-like’’ cells had a partial opc signa- ture including pdgfra expression (figure 5e).in addition a cell population appeared to be correlated to both opcs and iols (figure 5e) as cop-like cells.the gene expression profiles of igc-like precursors and astrocytes resembled those of the native developmental counterparts (figure 5e).strikingly pri-opc-like cells (e.g. olig1/2 ascl1 and ppp1r14b) and their mitotic cells in g1/s and g2/m phases were present in the highest abundance in neural cell types in the tumor tissues (72.6%; figure 5f).in contrast the unique gene sets in tumors exhibited pathway components enriched in gbm astrocytoma and stem-cell-related genes (figure 5j) suggesting that pri-opc analogs in the proneural- like glioma tissues contribute to malignant transformation during tumorigenesis.in contrast at dpi 25 few cnvs were detected in pri-opc populations (figure 6l) figure 5.for pri-opc score in figure 5g we selected all the opc-lineage cells from pdgfra-gfp dataset and employed seurat to get the variable genes.]
Patterns related to correlation between normal and tumor cell populations, as well as distribution of pri-opc-like cells in glioblastoma single-cell data.

Text 337
10.1016/j.stem.2019.03.006
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 6. pri-opcs are a transit-amplifying tumorigenic population during tumorigenesis (a–c) t-sne analysis of (a) glia-related cells, (b) pri-opc marker genes, and (c) stemness-related genes from 35 dpi glioma dataset. (d) distribution of stemness genes across major tumor subpopulations. (e) (left) expression of selected cell cycle genes (rows) in individual tumor cells (columns). cells were ordered by cell-cycle score. (right) t-sne plot of g1/s or g2/m marker genes is shown. (f) percentage of cycling opcs in pdgfra-gfp, hgfap-gfp, and tumor cell datasets. (g) percentage of proliferating (ki67+) cells that were olig2+ (left) and sox2+ (right) in pdgfra-gfp and tumor scrna-seq pools. (h) proportions of immune-related cells in single-cell profiles from dpi 25 and 35 mouse gliomas. (i) major cell populations (dots) from dpi 25 and 35 tumors scored for the pri-opc and stemness signatures. correlation values are in the top right quadrant. (j) the percentage of actively cycling cells among pri-opc-like cells in dpi 25 and 35 tumors. (k) the relative cycling scores of pri-opc-like cells from dpi 25 and 35 gliomas. data are presented as means ± sem. (l) ratios of cnvs in pri-opcs normalized against the ‘‘normal’’ cluster of macrophage and microglia at dpi 25 (above) and dpi 35 (below). (m and n) t-sne plot of (m) glia-related cells and (n) pri-opc-like and stemness marker genes after excluding immune cells in human idh-o dataset. (o) percentage of proliferating cells in pri-opc-like and other neural cell populations in human glioma datasets. p < 0.001; one-way anova with post hoc tukey’s test in (d), student’s t test in (k). see also figures s5 and s6 and table s3.']. Reference sentences:[further subclustering analysis based on cell-cycle markers indicated that the majority of pri-opcs also expressing cell-cycle genes in g1/s and g2/m phases (figure 6e).the fraction of cycling opcs in g1/s or g2/m phases (34.4%) was substantially higher than that in pdgfra-gfp+ or hgfap-gfp+ opc popula- tions from normal neonatal brains (figure 6f).among glial progenitors the frequency of mki67+ cells among olig2+ or sox2+ opc-like intermediates was higher in tumor tissues compared with frequencies in the developing cortex (figure 6g) consistent with an expansion of the pri- opc progenitor population during tumorigenesis.the clusters of tumor cells at dpi 25 were similar to those at dpi 35 (figures s5j–s5l) whereas immune cells (mainly microglia or macrophages) were more abundant at dpi 35 than dpi 25 (figure 6h) suggesting that the complexity of the tumor microenvironment is higher at the late stage of tumorigenesis.interestingly although the per- centage of pri-opc populations among neural cell groups was comparable (figure s5m) the pri-opc-like cells at the late phase at dpi 35 had a higher correlation coefficient score with respect to stemness signature genes than at dpi 25 (figure 6i).compared with microglia and macrophages within the tumor lesion which are non-malignant cells of a distinct lineage and presumably have ‘‘normal’’ copy numbers the majority of pri- opc-like cells at dpi 35 had extensive copy number aberrations (figure 6l).in contrast at dpi 25 few cnvs were detected in pri-opc populations (figure 6l) figure 5.markedly the pri-opc-like populations from distinct human gliomas exhibited a stemness-associated signa- ture (figures 6n and s6) and were the predominant mitotic cell proportion among neural cells in tumor tissues (figure 6o).]
Patterns related to correlation between pri-opc and stemness signatures in tumor cells, with increased cycling and copy number aberrations in late-stage tumorigenesis.

Text 338
10.1038/s41598-019-42578-z
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 2. wgcna identifies transcription factor network (tfn) modules potentially involved in neonatal germ cell development. (a) five distinct tfn modules were identified by expression correlation analysis. solid and dashed lines indicate pseudotime-fitted curves of the average and standard deviations, respectively. (b) hierarchical dendrogram (upper panel) and topological overlap matrix (lower panel) of the tfn modules. red and blue in the heatmap denote higher and lower correlations, respectively. (c) gene counts in each tfn module. their attributes in the gene groups (gg1 to gg4) are also indicated.']. Reference sentences:[]
Summary: Identification of transcription factor network modules based on correlation analysis, showing gene expression patterns in neonatal germ cell development.

Text 339
10.1038/s41586-019-1146-y
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 5 | yap1 cell-to-cell variability allows notch–dll1 activation and symmetry breaking. a, griph (graph inference of population heterogeneity)-based visualization (72 h and 120 h) of single cells. b, single-cell expression of yap1 targets and notch-sending cell marker genes. dotted square denotes high yap1 target-expressing cells. c, spearman correlation between yap1 target genes and expression of notch-sending cell marker genes at 72 h (n = 798 cells). d, multiplexed imaging of yap1 variability and dll1+ cells. top, nuclei (blue), yap1']. Reference sentences:[lgr5+ cells strongly downregulate lgr5 expression during the first day and reacquire it only around 0.4 pseu- dotime (approximately 62 h) after the appearance of paneth cells (fig 2h extended data fig 5a b).this loss of lgr5 expression also strongly correlates with the onset of fast proliferation and was con- firmed with live-cell imaging of a single lgr5+ cell (extended data fig 5c d supplementary video 4).a yap1–notch switch drives symmetry breaking to understand how yap1 variability drives symmetry breaking we performed single-cell (sc) rna-seq at different time points (fig 5a extended data fig 8a b 9a).dll1 expression occurs in cells with high levels of nuclear yap1 (fig 5d–f extended data fig 10a).moreover hes1 is expressed in single cells that neighbour dll1+ cells (fig 5d extended data fig 10a).between the 16-cell and the 32-cell stages paneth cells appear which are all positive for dll1 and start losing nuclear yap1 (fig 5e f extended data fig 10a b) as also seen in the loss of yap1 target gene expression in paneth cells from scrna-seq (fig 5c).all these inhibitors reduce symmetry breaking and paneth cell differenti- ation resulting in an increased fraction of enterocysts (fig 5g extended data fig 10e) and strengthening the correlation between the absence of paneth cells and enterocyst formation.a b first and second dimension are shown and results are colour-coded for enterocyte marker genes (as in extended data fig 9b) (a) and yap1 target genes (as in fig 5b) (b).]
Summary: Correlation between yap1 target genes and notch-sending cell marker genes drives symmetry breaking in single cells.

Text 340
10.1038/s41586-019-1146-y
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 3 | yap1 target genes are transiently expressed during organoids development. a, workflow for bulk rna-seq time course. b, expression profiles of cell-type markers mapped on pseudotime. paneth cells (lyz1), intestinal stem cells (iscs; lgr5), enterocytes (apoc3), goblet cells (muc2), endocrine cells (sst). c, hierarchical clustering of gene expression correlation profiles. d, magnitude of contribution (β) of transcription']. Reference sentences:[this shows that stem- cell markers are similarly downregulated at the transcriptional and protein level and then reacquired after paneth cell differentiation (fig 3b extended data fig 6b–d).similar expression dynamics were also observed for all other cell-type-specific genes (fig 3b extended data fig 6b–d).to gain an overview of transcriptional changes we then clus- tered the temporal expression patterns (fig 3c).to focus on the earliest phase of development we quantified transcription-factor-binding motifs in the promoters of genes expressed at 24 h (fig 3d).these transcription factors show an early increased expression whereas the expression of yap1 mrna stays constant (fig 3e extended data fig 6g).]
Summary: Correlation patterns in gene expression profiles during organoid development, including stem-cell markers downregulation and transcription factor dynamics.

Text 341
10.1038/s41586-019-1146-y
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 6e). to gain an overview of transcriptional changes, we then clustered the temporal expression patterns (fig 3c). this revealed three major clusters: first, a red cluster that is enriched in stem-cell markers, other cell-type-specific genes and genes involved in secretion and cell migration. there is a re-programming of cells into an undifferentiated state, which is followed by the re-establishment of lgr5+ stem cells and acquisition of differentiation after paneth cell formation (extended data fig 6f). second, a blue cluster that is enriched in functions linked to mitochondria, actin cytoskeleton, cell cycle and extracellular matrix. these genes are probably required to supply the energetic demand of undergoing rapid cell divisions. third, a green cluster that is enriched in functions related to metabolism and cell-type-related functions (extended data fig 6f). to focus on the earliest phase of development, we quantified transcription-factor-binding motifs in the promoters of genes expressed at 24 h (fig 3d). the most important motifs were for fosl1, tead1 and tead4, which all require yap1 as transcriptional co-activator24,25. these transcription factors show an early increased expression, whereas the expression of yap1 mrna stays constant (fig 3e, extended data fig 6g). yap1 is a mechanosensing nuclear effector of the hippo pathway and regulates organ growth, regeneration and tumorigenesis26,27. it is also an important effector of intestinal regeneration, in which it reprograms lgr5+ cells into lgr5− cells, thus inhibiting paneth cell differentiation28,29. when we correlated the expression levels of the early expressed genes (24 h versus 0 h) in organoid development with the expression levels of yap1-dependent gene expression28, we observed a good correlation (r = 0.45) (fig 3f). these early genes include yap1 target genes30 and fetal genes involved in regeneration31. thus, this provides support for a model in which organoid development follows a regenerative response with a transient activation of yap1 target genes in a lgr5− sphere.']. Reference sentences:[]
Summary: Correlation between early gene expression and Yap1-dependent gene expression during organoid development suggests a regenerative response with transient Yap1 activation.

Text 342
10.1038/s41586-019-1195-2
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 4 | sex-specific differential response to ad pathology. individuallevel transcriptome-wide gene–trait correlation analysis. box plots show the distribution of correlation values (pearson correlation coefficient) computed between gene-expression profiles (n = 17,926 genes) averaged for cells of each type across each individual, and the corresponding pathological measurements across individuals (n = 24 female individuals and n = 24 male individuals). box plots are centred around the median, with the interquartile range (iqr) defining the box. the upper whisker']. Reference sentences:[notably degs were robustly detected at different levels of expression (extended data fig 4a).consistent with the observed downregulation of ntng1 in excitatory neurons rna in situ hybridization revealed significantly fewer excit- atory neurons (marked by expression of slc17a7) with detectable ntng1 expression in brain sections from ad-pathology individuals compared with no-pathology individuals (extended data fig 4b).in males increased pathology correlated with a global transcriptional activa- tion in oligodendrocytes as reflected in positive correlation shifts (median correlations 0.203 (neurofibrillary tangle burden (nft)); 0.165 (tangles); 0.108 (amyloid); and 0.101 (plaques)) (fig 4 top).by contrast global shifts in transcription in oligodendrocytes were not observed in females; instead correlations with pathological traits and with cognition remained centred around zero (median correlations −0.04 (nft); −0.042 (tangles); 0.028 (amyloid); and −0.031 (plaques)) (fig 4).article research extended data fig 4 | expression values and validation of top degs.]
Summary: Correlation patterns between gene expression and pathological traits differ between male and female cells in single-cell transcriptomics.

Text 343
10.1016/j.celrep.2019.04.052
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 6. the scrna profile of egc cells (a) the t-sne plot that showed the distribution of the cancer cell cluster (pink, n = 798) in the atlas. see also figures s15a and s15b and data s1. (b) boxplot for the distribution of expression of the gastrointestinal cancer marker ceacam6, cell-cycle-related gene ccnd2, and apoptosis-related gene bax in diverse epithelial cell types, mann-whitney u test, fdr <1eà16. (c) boxplot of the differential expression for the putative cancer cell-related top six upregulated genes in the gc datasets in tcga. fdr <1eà5. see also data s1. (d) the similarity network among diverse epithelial cell types in our dataset. the thickness of edges in the network was denoted as the pearson correlation coefficient between the centroids of any pair of cell types. see also figures s15c and s15d. (e) the correlations between the centroids of cancer cells and metaplastic stem-like cells (left) and enterocytes (right). (f) violin plots display the distribution of expression of previously reported egc-related markers (fabp1 [left], cdh17 [center], and grn [right]) in cancer cells, enterocytes, gastric mucous cells, and stem-like cells. (g) the signature of egc cells. (h) the if staining for the representative gene in the egc signature, klk10, in sections derived from im, egc, and advanced gastric cancer (agc) biopsies. scale bar, 200 mm.']. Reference sentences:[herein we focused on the putative ‘‘cancer cell’’ cluster (figure 6a) emerging in the egc lesion from the network shown in figure 2c and characterized its expression profile.first we confirmed the specific upregulation of the gastroin- testinal cancer marker genes ceacam6 bax and ccnd2 in the cancer cell clusters (figure 6b).in rep- resenting each cell population by its centroid we calculated the correlation scores among diverse epithelial cell types and visualized them in a network (figure 6d).we found that some genes previously reported as gc-related early diagnosis markers such as fabp1 cea- cam5 and cdh17 showed extensive expression in enterocytes or other cell types suggesting their non-specific expression in cancer cells (figure 6f).as a result this panel consisted of six genes (figure 6g); of these six slc11a2 and klk7 have not been reported to be involved in gastric tumorigenesis.more impor- tant we found that the early cancer cells were close to mscs and the proliferative cell cluster was much closer to cancer cells figure 6.]
Summary: Correlations between cancer cells and other cell types, differential expression of cancer-related genes, and distribution of cancer-related markers in diverse epithelial cells were analyzed.

Text 344
10.1038/s41593-019-0393-4
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 4 | bulk rna-seq of bam subsets suggests tissue-specific functional adaptations. a, schematic overview of bulk rna-seq performed on various brain and peripheral macrophages. mf, macrophage; mg, microglia; pmf, peritoneal macrophage; amf, alveolar macrophage; kc, kupffer cell. b, principal component analysis of gene expression for brain and peripheral macrophage populations. c, pearson correlation matrix of brain and peripheral macrophages based on gene expression. d, genes that were significantly upregulated in microglia or bam subsets as compared to all three peripheral macrophages (pmfs, amfs, kcs) are shown in the venn diagram (adjusted p<0.01, log2(fc)>1); pvalues were corrected for multiple testing by the benjamini–hochberg method. e,f, volcano plots displaying genes that are de (adjusted p<0.01, log2(fc)>1) between (e) cphi-bams versus dhi-bams and (f) dhi-bams versus dlo-bams. blue dots represent de genes with mean normalized count< 30; red dots represent de genes with mean normalized count >30. pvalues were corrected for multiple testing by the benjamini–hochberg method. b–f, n=4 (or 3 for microglia) independent sorts per macrophage subset. g,h, gene ontology network based on genes that are de between bam subsets versus microglia. the venn diagram displays unique and intersecting de genes among the different bam subsets. each node represents a gene ontology. a selection of genes associated with each cluster of gene ontologies is displayed. gene ontology network based on de genes shared by all bam subsets with log2(fc)>1 (g) and based on de genes unique to cphi-bams (yellow), dhi-bams (red), dlo-bams (orange), shared by d-bams (green) and shared by cphi- and dhi-bams (blue) with log2(fc)>1 (h).']. Reference sentences:[therefore we first veri- fied the protein expression of subset-specific signature genes via flow cytometry (supplementary fig 4) which was then used to design a flow panel and gating strategy to identify all bam sub- sets in dissected or whole-brain samples (fig 3c).to assess inter-border variation we compared cphi-bams and dhi-bams (fig 4a).to further unveil bam-specific gene signatures we included tissue-resident macrophages from peritoneum lung and liver (fig 4a).principal component analysis of gene expression showed that while brain macrophages exhibited subset-specific segrega- tion they clustered closer together and at greater distances from peripheral macrophages (fig 4b).this was confirmed by pearson correlation coefficients (fig 4c).hundreds of de genes were observed when comparing brain and peripheral macrophages (fig 4d).a total of 1295 de genes were observed between cphi- and dhi-bams (fig 4e).dhi-bams and dlo-bams were more similar but still exhibited 541 de genes (fig 4f).microglia- enriched genes were related to functions such as neurogenesis and tgf-β signaling (supplementary fig 5c) while universally upregu- lated bam genes were linked to blood vessel development lipid and cholesterol metabolism immune response and antigen presentation (fig 4g).genes that were restricted to one or two bam subsets revealed subset-specific gene ontologies (fig 4h) including catego- ries related to angiogenesis ion transport and cell migration.in fig 4d–f differential expression is assessed using the moderated t-statistic (two-sided) and empirical bayes moderation of the standard errors towards a common value as implemented in the r bioconductor limma package (ebayes function default parameters).6263 p values were corrected for multiple testing by the benjamini–hochberg method.genes that were differentially expressed (adjusted p < 0.01) between microglia and dlo-bams dhi-bams and cphi-bams were used to determine lists of shared and bam subset-specific genes (see venn diagram in fig 4g).]
Patterns of correlation in gene expression between brain and peripheral macrophages, with subset-specific segregation and unique gene signatures.

Text 345
10.1038/s41590-019-0378-1
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 2 | distinct cellular composition in synovial tissue from oa, leukocyte-poor ra, and leukocyte-rich ra patients. a, histological assessment of synovial tissue derived from oa (n=15 independent tissue samples), leukocyte-poor ra (n=17 independent tissue samples), and leukocyte-rich ra (n=19 independent tissue samples). b, cellular composition of major synovial cell types by flow cytometry. c, synovial t cells, b cells, and monocytes by flow cytometry in samples from oa (n=15), leukocyte-poor ra (n=17), and leukocyte-rich ra (n=19). leukocyte-rich ra tissues were significantly higher infiltrated in synovial t cells (student’s one-sided t test p=4×10−9, t value=8.92, df=22.27) compared with leukocyte-poor ra and oa. leukocyte-rich ra tissues were significantly higher infiltrated in synovial b cells (student’s one-sided t test p=1×10−3, t value=3.50, df=20.56) compared with leukocyte-poor ra and oa. center value is mean. statistical significance levels: p<1×10−4 and p<1×10−3. d, quantitative histologic inflammatory scoring of both sublining cell layer and lining layer. leukocyte-rich ra samples (n=19) exhibited higher (student’s one-sided t test p=1×10−3, t value=3.21, df=30.66) krenn inflammation scores than leukocyte-poor ra (n=15) and oa tissues (n=10) samples. center value is mean. e,correlation between leukocyte infiltration assessed by cytometry with histologic inflammation score (n=44 biologically independent samples). student’s one-sided t test p=3×10−09, t value=7.15, df=46.51. f, tsne visualization of synovial cell types in oa, leukocyte-poor ra, and leukocyte-rich ra by mass cytometry density plot.']. Reference sentences:[we ana- lyzed the scrna-seq data by using the canonical variate coefficients for each cell to compute a nearest neighbor network identifying clusters with a community detection algorithm and evaluating the separation between clusters with silhouette analysis (methods and supplementary fig 2b).histology of ra synovial tissues revealed heteroge- neous tissue composition with variable lymphocyte and monocyte infiltration (fig 2ab and supplementary fig 2cd).whereas leukocyte-rich ra tissues had substantial infiltration of synovial t cells and b cells leukocyte- poor ra tissues had cellular compositions more similar to those of oa samples (fig 2c).synovial monocyte abundances were similar between ra and oa samples (fig 2c).samples that we classified as leukocyte-rich ra had significantly higher krenn inflammation scores than those of leu- kocyte-poor ra or oa samples (fig 2d).in contrast synovial lin- ing membrane hyperplasia was not significantly different between leukocyte-rich ra leukocyte-poor ra and oa samples (fig 2d).we observed significant correlation between synovial leukocyte infiltration as measured via flow cytometry and the histological krenn inflammation score (fig 2e).oa and leukocyte-poor ra samples were characterized by a high abun- dance of fibroblasts and endothelial cells; whereas leukocyte-rich ra tissues were characterized by a high abundance of cd4+ t cells cd8+ t cells and b cells (fig 2f and supplementary fig 3a).we used canonical variates (from cca with bulk rna-seq) to define 18 cell clusters that were independent of donor (n = 21) and technical plate effects (n = 24) (fig 3ab and supplementary fig 2c and fig 4a).we assessed protein fluorescence measurements of typical cell type markers which were consistent with our identified scrna-seq clusters (supplementary fig 2e).we have few b cells from oa synovia (fig 2b) which limited our ability to identify ra-associated b cell subsets through case–control com- parisons (fig 7g).the overall flowchart is shown in supplementary fig 2a.we used silhouette analysis5859 on the cell-to-cell euclidean distance matrix to evaluate our clustering results (supplementary fig 2b).]
Patterns of correlation between leukocyte infiltration and histologic inflammation scores in different synovial tissues.

Text 346
10.1038/s41590-019-0378-1
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 1 | overview of synovial tissue workflow and pairwise analysis of high-dimensional data. a, we acquired synovial tissue, disaggregated the cells, sorted them into four gates representing fibroblasts (cd45−cd31−pdpn+), monocytes (cd45+cd14+), t cells (cd45+cd3+), and b cells (cd45+cd3−cd19+). we profiled these cells with mass cytometry, flow cytometry, sorted low-input bulk rna-seq, and single-cell rna-seq (joint image from servier medical art). b, presence and absence of five different data types for each tissue sample after stringent quality control. c, schematic of each dataset and the shared dimensions used to analyze each of the three pairs of datasets with canonical correlation analysis (cca). d, cca finds a common mapping for two datasets. for bulk rna-seq and single-cell rna-seq, we first find a common set of g genes present in both datasets. each bulk sample si gets a coefficient ai and each cell ci gets a coefficient bi. the linear combination of all samples s1…n arranges bulk genes along the canonical variate cvs1 and the linear combination of all cells c1…m arranges single-cell genes along cvc1. cca finds the coefficients a1…n and b1…m that arrange the genes from the two datasets in such a way that the correlation between cvs1 and cvc1 is maximized. after cca finds the first pair of canonical variates, the next pair is computed on the residuals, and so on.']. Reference sentences:[in phase 1 of amp ra/sle we recruited 36 patients with ra who met the 1987 american college of rheumatology (acr) classification criteria and 15 patients with oa from ten clinical sites over 16 months (supplementary table 1) and obtained synovial tissues from ultrasound-guided biopsies or joint replacements (methods and fig 1a).we used our validated strategy for cell sorting22 (fig 1a) to isolate b cells (cd45+cd3−cd19+) t cells (cd45+cd3+) monocytes (cd45+cd14+) and stromal fibroblasts (cd45−cd31−pdpn+) (supplementary fig 1a).for samples with sufficient cell yield (methods) we also measured single-cell protein expression using a 34-marker mass cytometry panel (n = 26; supplementary table 2) and single-cell rna expression in sorted cell populations (n = 21; fig 1b).to confidently define ra-associated cell popu- lations we integrated multiple data modalities (fig 1bc).we used bulk rna-seq data as the reference point because these data were available for almost all the donors for all the cell types had the highest dimensionality and were least sensitive to technical artifacts (fig 1b).here we used cca to find linear com- binations of bulk rna-seq samples and scrna-seq cells (fig 1cd) to create gene expression profiles that were maximally correlated.consequently we employed a data-driven approach to separate samples on the basis of flow cytometry of lymphocyte and monocyte infiltration in each tissue sample (supplementary fig 1bc).we defined the maximum oa distance (4.5) as the threshold for defining leukocyte-rich ra (>4.5 n = 19) or leukocyte-poor ra (<4.5 n = 17) samples (methods and supplementary fig 1d).the gene averages for hla-drahi sublining a patient recruitment and tissue acquisition flow cytometry mass cytometry synovial cells histology bulk rna-seq cell sorting histology flow cytometry bulk rna-seq mass cytometry single-cell rna-seq oa (n = 15) ra (n = 17) leukocyte-rich ra (n = 19) b c fibroblasts (cd45–cd31–pdpn+) d pair of canonical variates (cv) cvs1 = a1s1 + a2s2 + ... + ansn cvc1 = b1c1 + b2c2 + ... + bmcm cvs1 sn s2 s1 cvc1 cm c2 c1 canonical correlation analysis on a pair of datasets s and c bulk rna-seq samples s1...n single-cell rna-seq cells c1...m find a and b that maximize correlation between cvs1 and cvc1 leukocyte-poor ten clinical sites single-cell rna-seq flow cytometry mass cytometry bulk rna-seq samples samples samples cells genes genes clusters gates cca cca cca single-cell rna-seq tissue disaggregation monocytes (cd45+cd14+) t cells (cd45+cd3+) b cells (cd45+cd3–cd19+) synovial tissue cell sorting into plates ~1000 cells per cell type ~1000 cells per cell type ~300000 cells ~100000 cells bulk rna-seq s: a matrix: g by n single-cell rna-seq c: a matrix: g by m cells per cluster cells per gate expression per gene expression per gene donors fig 1 | overview of synovial tissue workflow and pairwise analysis of high-dimensional data.intracellular staining of gzmk and gzmb proteins in disag- gregated tissue samples from patients with ra revealed that most cd8+ t cells in synovial tissue express gzmk (supplementary fig 10a).in a comparison of seven synovial tissue samples cd8+ t cells had a higher proportion of ifn𝛾+ cells than cd4+ t cells from the same sample (supplementary fig 10cd).first pca on post–quality control oa and ra bulk rna-seq samples (supplementary fig 11ab) showed that cell type accounted for most of the data variance.each cell type expressed specific marker genes: pdgfra for fibroblasts c1qa for monocytes cd3d for t cells and cd19 for b cells (supple- mentary fig 11c).within each cell type pca showed that leuko- cyte-rich ra samples separated from oa and leukocyte-poor ra samples (supplementary fig 11d–g).to define the pathways relevant to leukocyte-rich ra we used gsea weighted by gene effect sizes on gene ontology pathways and identified type i interferon response and inflammatory response (monocytes and fibroblasts) (supple- mentary fig 11hi) fc receptor signaling (monocytes) nf-kappa b signaling (fibroblasts) and interferon gamma (t cells) (fig 8a).we note that differences in leukocyte enrich- ment of joint replacement samples and biopsy samples were best explained by leukocyte infiltration and not by the histological scores (supplementary fig 1 and 11d–g).t cells b cells and monocyte proportions track with expression of individ- ual fibroblast genes (supplementary fig 11j).we further confirmed that the identified scrna-seq clusters are well correlated with the bulk rna-seq data and also the mass cytometry data (supplementary fig 12 and 13).− x x mah ( ) ( ) 1 we then defined the maximum value of all oa samples (4.5) as a threshold to define 19 leukocyte-rich ra (>4.5) and 17 leukocyte-poor ra (<4.5) samples in our cohort (supplementary fig 1d).we found that the low-quality samples also had low cell counts (supplementary fig 11a).cell lineage markers pdgfra c1qa cd3d and cd19 are expressed selectively by fibroblasts monocytes t cells and b cells respectively (supplementary fig 11c).then we tried each threshold for reads per molecule from 1–20 and chose the threshold that maximizes the ratio of true positive to false positive (supplementary fig 14).we show all post-qc single cells based on the number of genes detected and percent of molecules from mitochondrial genes for each identified cluster (supplementary fig 15).thus for each pair of single-cell rna-seq and bulk rna-seq we ran our pipeline on the shared samples that have both datasets for each cell type (fig 1b).data are shown in supplementary fig 10.]
Patterns related to correlation between bulk RNA-seq and single-cell RNA-seq gene expressions were analyzed using canonical correlation analysis.

Text 347
10.1093/eurheartj/ehz351
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 6 transcriptomic comparison of human embryonic stem cell-derived endothelial cells to mature endothelial cells. (a) three-dimensional principal component analysis plot of human embryonic stem cell-derived endothelial cells from d6, d8, and d12 datasets alongside mature endothelial cell: human dermal lymphatic endothelial cells, human umbilical vein endothelial cells, and human pulmonary artery endothelial cells. (b) venn diagrams of number of genes expressed in d6, d8, and d12 human embryonic stem cell-derived endothelial cells and the overlap of these genes with each type of mature endothelial endothelial cell. percentage of uniquely expressed human embryonic stem cell-derived endothelial cell genes shown in red. (c) tsne plot showing clustering of endothelial cell extracted from 10x datasets of human organs. (d) signature scores for each endothelial cell type shown in c. (e) heatmap with hierarchical clustering comparing transcriptional status of each cell type by spearman’s rank correlation coefficient.']. Reference sentences:[principal component analysis revealed that hesc-ec at d6 d8 and d12 cluster separately from mature ec (figure 6a).large proportions of genes were expressed within hesc- ec but not in mature ec (d8: 7.2%; d12: 7.3%; figure 6b).visualization of signature scores across all clusters demonstrated their high specifi- city to their corresponding cluster (figure 6d).furthermore correlations between transcriptomes of endothelial cell types were higher among the d6 d8 and d12 cells than these cells were to foetal (kidney) and mature endothelial cells (figure 6e).]
Patterns of correlation in gene expression between human embryonic stem cell-derived endothelial cells and mature endothelial cells, with higher correlations within developmental stages.

Text 348
10.1038/s41586-019-1198-z
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 2 | cll higher epimutation rate is associated with higher transcriptional entropy consistent with transcriptional dysregulation. a, schematic of the joint methylomics and transcriptomics method, applied to normal b cells (b04, n = 84) and cll cells (cll03, n = 94; cll04, n = 92). b, single-cell transcriptional entropy18 and epimutation rate for normal b and cll cells. see also extended data fig 6c. c, d, distribution of spearman’s rho of expression and promoter dname correlation (genes expressed >5 cells, dname >5 cpgs per promoter) across normal b cells (c; b04, 3,239 genes), or cll cells (d; cll03, 2,699 genes). spearman’s rho value distribution was compared to the distribution of values obtained by randomly permuted cell labels. see also extended data fig 6g–n. e, absolute change in spearman’s rho when comparing matched versus permuted dname and rna single-cell data in cll and normal b cells, across 990 genes overlapping between the three samples. f, g, representative genes with negative (f) or positive (g) correlation in single-cell expression methylation, determined by spearman correlation coefficient. scale bar represents promoter methylation and rna read counts scaled by maximal value. p values were determined by mann–whitney u-test (b), kolmogorov–smirnov test (c, d) or wilcoxon signed-rank test (e).']. Reference sentences:[to examine the effect of epimutation on gene expression at the single-cell level we integrated multiplexed single-cell reduced- representation bisulfite sequencing (scrrbs) with whole-transcriptome sequencing (fig 2a; extended data fig 6a).although the expected relationship between promoter dname and gene silencing was preserved in both cll and normal b cells (extended data fig 6b) a higher single-cell epimutation rate in cll was associated with higher transcriptional entropy—a measure of heterogeneity of gene expres- sion within cells18—than in normal b samples consistent with tran- scriptional dysregulation in cll (fig 2b; extended data fig 6c–e).a negative correlation between promoter dname and gene expression was observed at the single-cell level in both cll and normal b cells (fig 2c–f; extended data fig 6f–n) but was more pronounced in cll (fig 2e; extended data fig 6j n) suggesting that at least in part the decreased epigenetic–transcriptional coordination observed in bulk cll sequencing6 results from intra-leukaemic epigenetic diversity.we note that the analysis for extended data fig 2c was performed before the implementation of this filtering procedure to confirm that single-cell methylation values predominately equal 0 or 1 consistent with the random sampling of a single allele.the observed spearman’s rho was validated by a non-parametric permutation test in which we compared the correlation of promoter dname with gene expression against a null distribution obtained by randomly permuting cell labels for the methylation values (such that rna and dname are no longer linked at the single-cell level) and then comput- ing the spearman’s rank correlation coefficient (n = 26 permutations for normal b sample (b04) and n = 16 permutations for cll samples (cll03 and cll04) were used to obtain comparable numbers of genes between samples; see fig 2c d; extended data fig 6f).transcriptional entropy in fig 2b and extended data fig 6c d was computed as previously described18.we note that the analyses in fig 2b and extended data fig 6d were performed with downsampling to create a balanced dataset by matching the total number of rna read counts for all cells in each sample (n = 50000 reads per cell).letter research umethylated cytosine methylated cytosine cpg: 277 0.2 chr2 (q37.3) 0 0.2 0 50 bp normal cll twist2 % of dname (in-silico pooled single cell) a c d probability of observing k-cells at a cpg 0.06 0.02 0.04 0 2 8 6 4 cells expected number of observations given k-cells 3 1 2 0 2 8 6 4 cells biallelic monoallelic coverage % in ~230 germline snps 0 50 100 b01 0 number of cpgs (x106) 0 1 2 3 % methylation (rrbs bulk) 20 40 60 80 100 cll01 number of cpgs (x106) 0 1 2 3 0% methylation (rrbs bulk) 20 40 60 80 100 b % methylation (single cells) 0 10 0 20 40 60 80 100 b01 number of cpgs (x105) 5 cll01 0% methylation (single cells) 20 40 60 80 100 0 10 number of cpgs (x105) 5 239758000 239755000 single cell dna methylation extended data fig 2 | single-cell dna methylation coverage analysis.]
Patterns of correlation between gene expression and promoter methylation at the single-cell level, with higher dysregulation in CLL cells compared to normal B cells.

Text 349
10.1126/science.aav8130
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 4. correlation of cell type–specific gene dysregulation in asd patients with clinical severity. (a) strategy for correlating individuallevel degs and clinical severity. adi-r subscores were ranked and combined. asd cases were compared to the combined control profiles in each cell type to generate individual fold changes. (b) cell types ranked by correlation of degs with combined clinical scores. cell type degs in']. Reference sentences:[we obtained autism diagnostic interview– revised (adi-r) scores that measured impair- ment of behavioral domains in asd (fig 4a).we correlated patient adi-r scores with relative changes of degs and observed that changes in l2/3 neurons and microglia were the most predictive of clinical severity (fig 4b).we found that patients with different degrees of clinical severity clustered according to dysregulation of l2/3 neuron and microglia degs (fig 4 c and d).]
Summary: Correlation of dysregulated genes in specific cell types with clinical severity in ASD patients.

Text 350
10.1038/s41596-019-0164-4
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 1 | mars-seq2.0 enables efficient sampling of rare subpopulations. a, schematic presenting the ability of mars-seq2.0, using unbiased indexed facs sorting, to perform data-driven enrichment and depletion strategies (represented by forward and back arrows) to efficiently identify rare subpopulations, in comparison to drop-based methods. bone is shown as an example of a heterogeneous organ characterized by scrna-seq. b, indexed facs sorting (recording of surface marker levels for each sorted single cell), which is an optional element of mars-seq2.0, enables correlation of unbiased transcriptional mapping with protein markers. c, mars-seq2.0 can be integrated with crispr-pooled screens (crisp-seq38). a perturbation of several targets can be made in vitro or in vivo, and an affected cell is detected by the cell transcriptome. using a gene editing system in which cells derived from mice expressing cas9-gfp are transduced with a pooled lentiviral library harboring guide rnas, it is possible to perturb gene a (right side), gene b (left) or both (middle) in the same cell.']. Reference sentences:[because cells and especially combinations of stem cells progenitors and various types of mature cells span many orders of magnitude in abundance relying solely on unbiased sampling to accurately characterize rare populations becomes infeasible as the marginal utility of collecting more cells diminishes quickly (fig 1a).combining unbiased transcriptional maps with protein markers enables iterative refinement of cell sampling using facs-based enrichment and/or depletion strategies for more efficient and deeper sampling of key rare subpopulations (fig 1a).combining index sorting and scrna-seq has many other potential utilities including refinement and generation of new sorting panels for both diagnostics and basic research and for mapping ﬂuorescent reporter mar- kers3637 for lineage tracing and crispr pooled screens (crisp-seq38; fig 1bc).see an example of a good-quality library profile in supplementary fig 10.]
Patterns related to correlation between unbiased transcriptional mapping and protein markers, enabling efficient identification of rare subpopulations.

Text 351
10.1016/j.neuron.2019.04.010
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 4. sccogaps analysis on scrnaseq samples reveals patterns of gene expression within developmental processes (a) correlation heatmap of pattern weight with cell types. (b–d) heatmaps of the top 20 genes by gene weight of patterns (b) 16, (c) 34, and (d) 70 that correspond to horizontal cells, amacrine cells, and rod photoreceptors, respectively. (e and f) examples of graphical representations of pattern weights of individual cells within the umap-dimension reduction. (e) pattern 15 marks the terminal trajectory of rgcs. (f) pattern 36, with pattern marker xist, highlights sex of origin. (g) combinations of patterns can be used to assess developmental processes such as the inﬂuence of cell-cycle phase on rpc clustering. (h) sccogaps pattern weights of retinal cells plotted within the complex pseudotime (figure 2a) highlights photoreceptor-bipolar cell precursors in pattern 30, using otx2 as a pattern marker. abbreviations: photo precurs, photoreceptor precursors.']. Reference sentences:[unlike other methods that learn gene signa- pattern 30 2.5 5.0 7.5 log10(pattern weight) -4 -2 0 2 4 6 -4 -2 0 2 4 6 -4 -2 0 2 4 6 4 2 0 -2 -4 -4 -2 0 2 4 -4 -2 0 2 4 6 pattern 31 pattern 49 pattern 78 pattern 36 -4 6 -2 0 2 4 6 -2 -4 0 2 4 -4 -2 0 2 4 pattern 15 early rpcs late rpcs horizontal amacrine rgcs cones rods muller glia bipolar neurogenic photo precurs patt.18 patt.8 patt.48 patt.74 patt.20 patt.67 patt.19 patt.41 patt.17 patt.37 patt.43 patt.7 patt.16 patt.1 patt.2 patt.5 patt.73 patt.69 patt.34 patt.59 patt.44 patt.12 patt.42 patt.39 patt.55 patt.46 patt.79 patt.54 patt.61 patt.68 patt.21 patt.70 patt.40 patt.66 patt.3 patt.51 patt.45 patt.72 patt.47 patt.6 patt.38 patt.13 patt.26 patt.33 patt.9 patt.27 patt.62 patt.53 patt.10 patt.56 patt.75 patt.15 patt.35 patt.71 patt.29 patt.63 patt.28 patt.76 patt.50 patt.60 patt.58 patt.77 patt.65 patt.32 patt.4 patt.30 patt.52 patt.11 patt.80 patt.22 patt.36 patt.57 patt.24 patt.31 patt.49 patt.25 patt.78 patt.64 patt.14 patt.23 celltype −2 −1 0 1 2 3 znorm muller glia neurogenic early rpcs late rpcs cones photo precurs bipolar rods rgcs amacrine horizontal malat1 meg3 snap25 stmn2 ina stmn4 tmsb10 tuba1a tubb2b stmn3 mllt11 rtn1 tmsb4x nefl nefm lhx1os onecut2 pcsk1n nnat tfap2b gene celltype −1 0 1 2 3 znorm late rpcs early rpcs neurogenic bipolar photo precurs muller glia cones rods rgcs amacrine horizontal hist3h2ba nnat sox4 tagln3 dpysl3 sox11 cd24a elavl3 actb crmp1 mllt11 rtn1 stmn2 tuba1a tubb2b tubb3 basp1 tmsb10 ckb malat1 celltype −1 0 1 2 znorm gene pattern 16 - top 20 genes by pattern weight - horizontal pattern pattern 34 - top 20 genes by pattern weight - amacrine pattern rods rgcs early rpcs late rpcs neurogenic photo precurs amacrine horizontal muller glia bipolar cones tmsb4x btg1 malat1 sec62 2010107e04rik cox17 ttc14 gpx4 golgb1 tmem243 gnb1 ssu72 ktn1 guk1 ndufa4 syngr1 rsrp1 tax1bp1 dohh tma7 −1 0 1 2 znorm pattern 70 - top 20 genes by pattern weight - rod pattern celltype gene a b c d e f g h figure 4. sccogaps analysis on scrna- seq samples reveals patterns of gene expression within developmental processes (a) correlation heatmap of pattern weight with cell types.individual patterns reﬂect cell- type specification and capture key devel- opmental transitions including popula- tions such as neurogenic rpcs and photoreceptor precursors (stein-o’brien et al. 2019) (figure 4a).while patterns can distinguish cell types and correlated well for example with annotations of hor- izontal cells (patterns 1 2 and 16) (figure 4a) many genes with high gene weights within individual patterns showed expression across multiple cell types (figures 4b–4d).additional patterns are also associated with mature rgcs (pattern 15) (figure 4e) or recover other phenotypic features of these data such as sex (pattern 36) (figure 4f).plotting pattern weights on pseudotime representations (fig- ure s16) highlights the association of patterns with develop- mental transitions (figure 4h; photoreceptor-bipolar cell precursors with high otx2 expression).]
Patterns of gene expression related to correlation between cell types, developmental transitions, and phenotypic features such as sex and cell cycle phase.

Text 352
10.1038/s41592-019-0425-8
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 4 | comparisons of scrna-seq trajectory analysis methods. a, the trajectory path chosen for the rna mixture dataset (top) (n=340) and cell mixture dataset (bottom) (n=169) along with visualizations of the output from slingshot, monocle-ddrtree and slicer. cells are colored by the proportion of h2228 rna present, which was chosen as the root of the trajectory. b, violin plot showing the pearson correlation coefficient between the calculated pseudotime and the ground truth, for the best performing combination of each method on each dataset. stars indicate the mean values (n=8 for cellmix, n=4 for rnamix). c, the proportion of cells that are correctly assigned to the trajectory. stars indicate the mean values (n=8 for cellmix, n=4 for rnamix).']. Reference sentences:[although a wide range of silhouette widths was observed among different methods in different data- sets most normalization methods apart from tmm markedly increased silhouette width relative to the unnormalized data (fig 2a and supplementary fig 4ab).for simplicity we chose h2228 as the root state of the trajectory (fig 4a).we evaluated the correlation between the pseudotime generated from each method and the rank order of the path from h2228 to the other cell lines on the basis of the cell–rna mixture information (fig 4b) to exam- ine whether each method can position cells in the correct order.in addition we calculated the coverage of the trajectory path (fig 4c) which is the proportion of cells that have been assigned to the cor- rect path and assesses the sensitivity of the method.for each method in each dataset we selected the best results from all combinations on the basis of the performance metrics (fig 4bc).slingshot and monocle2 showed robust results according to both metrics and generated meaningful representations of the trajectory while slingshot sometimes gave an extra trajectory path (fig 4a and supplementary fig 7).slingshot does not perform dimensionality reduction itself and presents the result as is whereas monocle2 uses ddr-tree for dimensionality reduction by default and tends to place cells at the nodes of the tree rather than in transi- tion between two nodes (fig 4a).]
Summary: Evaluation of trajectory analysis methods based on correlation with ground truth and correct assignment of cells to trajectory paths.

Text 353
10.1038/s41592-019-0425-8
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 2 | comparisons of normalization and imputation methods using multiple mixture datasets. a, silhouette widths calculated using the known cell– mixture groups after different normalization methods, summarized across all datasets and normalized against the silhouette widths obtained without normalization (‘none’). b–e, example pca plots after normalization or with imputation by different methods using the rnamix_cel-seq2 dataset (n=340). percentage variation explained by each principal component is included in the respective axis labels. f, average pearson correlation coefficients for ‘pseudo cells’ within the same groups in the rnamix_cel-seq2 and rnamix_sort-seq datasets (n=2) for different combinations of normalization and imputation methods. g–j, heat map of pearson correlation coefficients of samples in the rnamix_cel-seq2 dataset that have pure h2228 (n=45) or hcc827 (n=44) rna obtained from different imputation methods.']. Reference sentences:[by comparing a range of quality control metrics collected across datasets using scpipe16 we observed that data from all platforms were of consistently high quality in terms of their exon mapping rates and the total unique molecular identifier (umi) counts per cell (supplementary fig 2).we found substantial differences in the percentage of reads mapping to intron regions in datasets generated from different protocols and experimental designs (supplementary fig 2a).although a wide range of silhouette widths was observed among different methods in different data- sets most normalization methods apart from tmm markedly increased silhouette width relative to the unnormalized data (fig 2a and supplementary fig 4ab).example pca plots on an rna mixture dataset after differ- ent normalization combinations are shown in fig 2b–e.in general imputation induces higher intra-group correlation although con- siderable differences are observed depending on the normaliza- tion method chosen (fig 2f).overall the sample correlation within the same group is lower when the messenger rna amount decreases (fig 2g) and correlation increases after imputation (fig 2h–j).we found that knn-smoothing was associated with lower ari and higher cluster numbers (supplementary fig 5bc) which is consistent with our previous results (fig 2ch) and serves as a further indication that this method can introduce spurious clusters.clustering of the pearson correlation coefficients in fig 2 was performed using the hclust function in base r. to summarize the results of each analysis we fitted a linear model using the lm base r function with the performance score as the dependent variable and type of method and experimental designs as binary covariates.]
Patterns related to correlation in normalization and imputation methods across different datasets and cell types were analyzed. Correlation increased after imputation and varied with normalization methods.

Text 354
10.1016/j.celrep.2019.04.102
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 3. gene co-expression networks and correlation analysis (a and b) weighted gene co-expression analysis of d (a) and evp (b) populations revealed two regulatory modules in each, which are shown as orange and blue. (c–f) the genes from each module were analyzed for significantly enriched biological processes using gene ontology annotations for the d population (c and e) and the evp population (d and f). the size of the circles in (c)–(f) represents the number of significantly enriched genes per module in each process. the adjusted p value (false discovery rate) threshold was 0.05, and significance is shown as a gradient of color in each circle from blue (less significant) to red (more significant).']. Reference sentences:[the d modules contained 194 (blue) and 139 (orange) genes (fig- ure 3a) and evp modules contained 121 (blue) and 257 (orange; figure 3b).]
Patterns of gene co-expression networks and correlation analysis reveal two regulatory modules in each population, with enriched biological processes represented by circle size and color gradient.

Text 355
10.1016/j.celrep.2019.04.102
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 2. expression of marker genes defining each population (a) expression levels of six canonical marker genes were overlaid on the 2d t-sne plot and highlight the cell specificity of their expression. the expression levels are shown as log2(counts + 1)-transformed values, and the gradient represents low (gray) to high values (purple). (b) heatmap of lasso-identified marker genes. marker genes identified using the lasso machine learning approach clearly mark each cluster and explain the most deviance per cluster. expression levels are plotted as log2(counts + 1)-transformed values. the color gradient shows low (purple) to high expression levels (yellow). (c) pairwise spearman’s correlations were performed between single-cell data for each cluster and bulk rna-sequencing data for normal or tumor populations of d and evp. the correlation coefficient for each test is shown in the center of each square, and the color gradient shows the range of correlation coefficients from 0 (blue) to 1 (red).']. Reference sentences:[using these marker genes we visualized cells belonging to clusters one and two using t-distributed stochastic neighbor (t-sne) dimensionality reduction and observed a clear separa- tion between cells expressing cdh5 and pecam1 (d; cluster one) and those expressing sox9 il33 and pdgfra (evp; cluster two; figure 2a).our re- sults show that each cluster expresses a subset of genes figure 2.expression levels of across all clusters are shown for 103 genes in figure 2b and the table of genes per cluster and their associated deviance coefficients are presented in table s1.we also observed a moderate albeit less significant correlation of whole-tissue evp with cluster one cells (spearman’s rho = 0.60; p = 9.03 3 10=202; figure 2c).]
Summary: Correlation patterns between single-cell clusters and bulk RNA-seq data, visualized by marker gene expression and heatmap analysis.

Text 356
10.1038/s41586-019-1263-7
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 2 | deletion of fapα-expressing cells attenuates synovial inflammation and damage. a, joint inflammation in deleted (stia dtr+, n = 13) versus non-deleted (stia dtr−, n = 9) stia mice compared to non-arthritic deleted (dtr+, n = 6) and non-deleted (dtr−, n = 6) mice, with area under the curve (auc) analysis. p ≤ 0.0001. dtx, diphtheria toxin. au, arbitrary units. b, effect of sustained fapα cell deletion on joint inflammation in persistent stia (dtr+ and dtr−, n = 8) mice, and nonarthritic (dtr+ and dtr−, n = 4) mice, with auc analysis. p ≤ 0.0001. c, representative micro computed tomography (micro-ct) and histological images of day 28 persistent stia mice. arrows indicate areas of interest (n = 16 mice per group). scale bars, 100 μm. d, quantification of micro-ct data, osteoclast number and histomorphometric analysis of bone erosion, pannus formation and cartilage damage. p ≤ 0.0001. e, representative histology at day 9 stia and quantification (n = 14 mice per group; p = 0.0034). arrow shows leukocyte infiltration. sm, synovial membrane. scale bars, 100 μm. f, spearman’s correlation between the']. Reference sentences:[deletion of these cells led to a significant reduction in the cellularity of the synovial membrane (extended data fig 1n–p) attenuated synovial inflammation and accelerated resolution in both the resolving (fig 2a) and persistent models of stia (fig 2b) with the same effect observed regardless of the stage of arthritis at the time of deletion (extended data fig 2a b).however deletion before induction of arthritis had no effect on joint thickness (extended data fig 2c) an observation consistent with the low numbers of fapα+ cells in the syn- ovial membrane under resting conditions (extended data fig 1a c).fapα+ cell deletion led to reduced leukocyte infiltration (fig 2e) negatively correlated with the severity of joint inflammation (fig 2f) and was associated with a reduction in the number of both ll and sl fibroblasts with no significant change in pericyte numbers (fig 2g).accompanying these changes was a marked reduction in the number of synovial leukocytes specifically neutrophils mac- rophages cd11b+ dendritic cells and monocytes but not eosinophils (extended data fig 3b for gating strategy fig 2h for resolving stia model data and extended data fig 3c for persistent model) and a reduction in the percentage of major histocompatibility complex (mhc) class ii-expressing macrophages (persistent model: extended data fig 3c; resolving model: extended data fig 3e).these cellular changes in the synovium were accompanied by a marked reduc- tion in pro-inflammatory chemokines cytokines rankl and matrix metalloproteases (mmps) (fig 2i) demonstrating that synovial fapα+ cells are a major source of these proteins.letter research extended data fig 2 | effects of fapα cell deletion.]
Patterns related to correlation between fapα+ cell deletion and synovial inflammation reduction and resolution in arthritis models.

Text 357
10.1038/s41588-019-0424-9
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 3 | sensitive and drug-resistant specific h3k27me3 chromatin landscapes in pdx model of triple-negative breast cancer treated with capecitabine. a, hierarchical clustering and corresponding heatmap of cell-to-cell pearson’s correlation scores for the scchip-seq datasets. the sample color code is green for hbcx-95 (n=484 single cells) and pink for hbcx-95-capar (n=767 single cells) and the unique read count is indicated above the heatmap. b,c, t-sne representation of the scchip-seq datasets; cells are colored according to the tumor of origin (b) and consensus clustering segmentation (c) (supplementary fig 13c). d, item consensus score with regard to chrom_c2; a score of 1 corresponds to a cell highly representative of the chrom_c2 cluster. the dotted lines represent an item consensus score of 0.9 relative to chrom_c2 (left line) or chrom_c1 (right line). the green cells originate from hbcx-95, the pink cells from hbcx-95-capar. the triangles highlight cells with a consensus score>0.9 and in opposition to their tumor of origin. e, volcano plot representing adjusted p values (two-sided wilcoxon signed-rank test) versus log2 fold changes for differential analysis comparing chromatin enrichment between chrom_c2 and chrom_c1 (n=569 enriched and 114 depleted regions with thresholds of 0.01 for adjusted p value and 1 for absolute log2 fold change). f, left panel: pie chart representing the number of significantly differentially enriched windows (two-sided wilcoxon signed-rank test) overlapping a tss and with detectable transcription. right panel: log2 expression fold change between cells from hbcx-95-capar and hbcx-95 for all detected genes (n=37) within differentially enriched loci. the barplot is colored according to the log2 fold change and the associated adjusted p value (black for adjusted p values>0.01, green for significantly underexpressed and red for significantly overexpressed). g,h, left panels: the aggregated h3k27me3 chromatin profiles for each cluster are shown for igf2bp3 and col4a2 (n=457 and 794 single cells for chrom_c1 and chrom_c2, respectively). differentially bound regions identified using a two-sided wilcoxon signed-rank test are highlighted in gray with the corresponding adjusted p value and log2 fold change. the number and the percentage of cells with h3k27me3 enrichment within each cluster are indicated above the tracks. right panels: t-sne plots representing scrna-seq datasets; the points are colored according to the cell expression signal for igf2bp3 or col4a2. i, aggregated h3k27me3 chromatin profiles for the hoxd locus depleted in h3k27me3 in chrom_c2, but with no detectable transcription with scrna-seq (n=457 and 794 single cells for chrom_c1 and chrom_c2, respectively). differentially bound regions identified using a two-sided wilcoxon signed-rank test are highlighted in gray with the corresponding adjusted p value and log2 fold change. the number and the percentage of cells with h3k27me3 enrichment within each cluster are indicated above the tracks.']. Reference sentences:[based on both chromatin and transcriptomic profiles cells clustered primarily according to their sensitive or resistant tumor origin (fig 3a–c and supplementary fig 13bc).while the chromatin profiles of sensitive cells were largely homogeneous dis- tinct chromatin states within the resistant population were appar- ent (fig 3a) suggesting that heterogeneous populations of resistant cells with distinct chromatin features emerged.however consen- sus clustering also showed that 3% of cells from the untreated tumor (n = 13 out of 484) robustly classify with resistant cells (fig 3d consensus score > 0.9) suggesting that they share common chro- matin features.within these loci six genes were significantly deregulated according to scrna-seq and all in accordance to their h3k27me3 chromatin states (fig 3f and supplementary fig 13e).we also identified igf2bp3 a gene known to promote resistance to chemotherapy21 (fig 3g) and regions with markers of epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (col4a2 hoxd cluster; fig 3hi) which induces resistance to chemotherapy2223.each bead carries on average approximately 5 × 107 copies of a unique barcode (see supplementary fig 3 for quality controls of the single-cell barcodes).2 by first searching for the constant 4-bp linkers found between the 20-mer indexes of the barcode allowing up to one mismatch in each linker (see supplementary fig 3 and supplementary table 5 for the barcode structure).we combined coverage matrices for each of our four analyses from the following samples: (1) ramos and jurkat (fig 1); (2) mouse cells from hbcx-95 and hbcx-95-capar (fig 2); (3) human cells from hbcx-95 and hbcx-95- capar (fig 3); and (4) human cells from hbcx-22 and hbcx-22-tamr (fig 4).]
Patterns related to correlation between chromatin and transcriptomic profiles in sensitive and resistant tumor cells were observed. Some cells from the untreated tumor shared common chromatin features with resistant cells. Several genes were deregulated according to scRNA-seq in accordance with their h3k27me3 chromatin states.

Text 358
10.1038/s41588-019-0424-9
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 4 | a fraction of cells from sensitive tumor share h3k27me3 chromatin features with resistant cells in a model of luminal estrogen receptorpositive pdx treated with tamoxifen. a, hierarchical clustering and corresponding heatmap of cell-to-cell pearson’s correlation scores for scchip-seq datasets. the tumor of origin is indicated in green for hbcx-22 (n=255 single cells) and pink for hbcx-22-tamr (n=118 single cells); the unique read count is indicated above the heatmap. b, t-sne representation of the scchip-seq datasets; cells are colored according to the tumor of origin (left) and consensus clustering segmentation (right) (supplementary fig 14c,d). c, item consensus score with regard to chrom_c2. a score of 1 corresponds to a cell highly representative of the chrom_c2 cluster. the dotted lines represent an item consensus score of 0.9 relative to chrom_c2 (upper line) or chrom_c1 (lower line). d, pie chart representing the number of significantly differentially enriched (adjusted p value<0.01, two-sided wilcoxon signed-rank test, and absolute log2 fold change >1) windows overlapping a tss and with detectable transcription. e, hierarchical clustering and corresponding heatmap of cell-to-cell pearson’s correlation scores for the scrna-seq datasets. the tumor of origin is indicated in green for hbcx-22 (n=1,275 single cells) and pink for hbcx-22-tamr (n=399 single cells); the umi count is indicated above the heatmap. f, t-sne representation of the scrna-seq datasets; the cells are colored according to the tumor of origin (left) and consensus clustering segmentation (right) (supplementary fig 14f). g, hierarchical clustering of average expression scores per cell for each of the top ten upregulated pathways (with the lowest adjusted p values) in hbcx-22-tamr versus hbcx22. the tumor of origin, rna cluster and unique read count are indicated above the heatmap. h,i, left panels: snapshots for egfr and igfbp3 loci of aggregated h3k27me3 chromatin profiles for each cluster (n=212 and 161 single cells for chrom_c1 and chrom_c2, respectively). differentially bound regions identified using a two-sided wilcoxon signed-rank test are highlighted in gray with the corresponding adjusted p value and log2 fold change. middle panels: barplots displaying the percentage of cells with h3k27me3 enrichment in each cluster. the corresponding number of cells is indicated above the barplots. for each cluster, the origin of the cells (green for hbcx-22 and pink for hbcx-22-tamr) is indicated below. right panels: barplots displaying the average log2 fold change in egfr and igfbp3 expression levels for cells in each cluster versus all remaining cells. the percentage of cells, within each cluster, with detectable egfr or igfbp3 expression is indicated above the barplot. for each cluster, the origin of the cells (green for hbcx-22 and pink for hbcx-22-tamr) is indicated below.']. Reference sentences:[however 16% (n = 41 out of 255) of cells within the sensitive tumor shared chromatin features with all resistant cells (fig 4a–c and supplementary fig 14c).with scrna-seq we could only detect transcription in 2% of differentially enriched windows and significant differential expression for three genes all showing transcription activation in a fraction of resistant cells mir- roring their loss of h3k27me3 enrichment: egfr a gene implicated in resistance to tamoxifen2526; igfbp3; and alcam (fig 4dhi and supplementary fig 14g).parallel scrna-seq analysis of the same cell suspension iden- tified several clusters within the resistant and sensitive tumor (fig 4ef and supplementary fig 14f).while no cells from the sensi- tive tumor clustered with the resistant cells we show that cells from the rna_c6 cluster originating from the sensitive tumor (correspond- ing to 211 out of 1275 cells (17%)) display activation of pathways characteristic of resistant tumor cells among which basal-like gene signatures and signature of epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (fig 4g).after rna digestion dna was amplified by pcr using seq5 (supplementary table 4 and supplementary fig 4).we combined coverage matrices for each of our four analyses from the following samples: (1) ramos and jurkat (fig 1); (2) mouse cells from hbcx-95 and hbcx-95-capar (fig 2); (3) human cells from hbcx-95 and hbcx-95- capar (fig 3); and (4) human cells from hbcx-22 and hbcx-22-tamr (fig 4).for fig 4f we studied the ten most significantly enriched pathways among overexpressed genes in cells from hbcx-22-tamr versus cells from hbcx-22.]
Patterns related to correlation between chromatin features and gene expression in sensitive and resistant tumor cells were analyzed.

Text 359
10.1038/s41556-019-0336-z
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 4 | a pan-cardiac programme for heart fate specification. a, smoothed gene expression along fhp pseudotime for de novo expressed pan-cardiac genes (activated) and primed asm genes (downregulated). white vertical lines: transitions between predicted regulatory states. b, pc1 correlates with pseudotime. sample size (cells on the fhp trajectory) n=379. c, average pc1-loading scores for the indicated gene categories, mapped onto the fhp trajectory. d, proportions of de novo pan-cardiac and fhp-specific genes with the calculated activation pseudotime in binned pseudotime windows along the fhp trajectory. e, expression profiles of mmp21 along the fhp trajectory. purple dashed line: calculated activation pseudotime. circle colours: samples of origin as in fig 2b. f, activation pseudotimes for de novo expressed pan-cardiac genes along first- and second heart lineage pseudotime axes. g, proportions of de novo expressed pan-cardiac genes with the calculated activation pseudotime in binned pseudotime windows along the fhp and shp trajectories. for d,e,g, x axis: normalized pseudotime. black dashed lines: transitions between regulatory states.']. Reference sentences:[using the whole dataset while ignor- ing established clonality we identified multipotent progenitors and separate cardiac and pharyngeal muscle branches (supplementary fig 4a).validating this approach in silico trajec- tories captured known lineage-specific expression changes of car- diopharyngeal regulators181924 (supplementary fig 4c–e).however the latter occur preferentially in defined ‘pseudotime’ windows for multiple genes (supplementary fig 4c–e) consistent with more abrupt biological transitions such as cell divisions24.using constrained hierarchical clus- tering25 we identified 10 putative discrete regulatory states across the cardiopharyngeal trajectories including two multipotent states and eight successive transitions towards fate restriction (fig 2d and supplementary fig 4b).conversely primed pharyngeal muscle mark- ers such as hand-r were downregulated along cardiac trajectories as expected26 (fig 2f and supplementary fig 4c–e).activation of de novo pan-cardiac markers and downregulation of primed pharyngeal muscle and multipotent- specific markers accounted for most gene expression changes (fig 4a and supplementary fig 5e–g).we identified a principal component (principal component 1 pc1) which correlated highly with pseudotime (pcc = 0.96; fig 4b) and used the pc1 loading of each gene to estimate the relative contribution of each class of markers to discrete regulatory states (fig 4c).the latter is defined by the virtual absence of tvc- specific and primed asm-specific transcripts and high levels of both primed and de novo expressed pan-cardiac markers thus probably corresponding to a heart-specific state whereas activa- tion of cell-type/lineage-specific genes underlies the fhp2-to- fhp3 transition and their expression helps define the first heart lineage-specific state fhp3 as is the case for mmp21 (fig 4de).accordingly we observed a striking agreement between the ordered activation pattern of individual genes along each trajectory (fig 4f) suggesting a remarkably conserved devel- opmental programme.]
Correlation between principal component 1 and pseudotime, reflecting gene expression changes along cardiac fate specification trajectory.

Text 360
10.1038/s41556-019-0336-z
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 2 | reconstruction of cardiopharyngeal developmental trajectories. a, cell lineages used to reconstruct three unidirectional cardiopharyngeal trajectories. b, diffusion maps showing the cardiopharyngeal trajectories. the colour-coded cell identities are defined by unsupervised clustering from larvae dissociated at indicated times (supplementary fig 1a). black lines, principal curves; light grey contours, single-cell density distributions. the colour coding corresponds to assigned cell identities following clustering at each time. dc, diffusion coordinate. c, distribution of identified cell types isolated at defined times along the trajectories, showing the general agreement between the time series and developmental progression, but also that cells isolated at a given time are not all at the same developmental pseudotime. d, cross-correlation heatmaps to infer regulatory states along the trajectories. left: dendrograms obtained from constrained hierarchical clustering. the top bars indicate the sample of origin with colour coding as in c. e, relative cell identity composition for each regulatory state identified on the trajectories. note the 16asm cells clustering with the ‘stvc’ state in the asm trajectory, indicating that these cells retain most stvc characteristics and have not yet activated the asm-specific programme. f, pseudotemporal expression profiles of indicated genes along the fhp trajectory. x axis, normalized pseudotime as defined in b; y axis, relative expression level. black curves indicate the smoothed expression. black dashed lines indicate the transitions between predicted regulatory states as defined in d and colour-coded below. purple dashed lines indicate calculated activation or inactivation pseudotime. dot colours refer to the sample of origin as indicated in c. g, proportions of primed versus de novo expressed genes among defined categories of marker genes.']. Reference sentences:[the top 111 predicted pan-cardiac genes comprised established cardiac determinants including gata4/5/6 nk4/nkx2-5 and hand and we confirmed heart-specific expression by fluorescent in situ hybridization (fish) for 19 candidate markers including meis and lrp4/8 (fig 1d supplementary fig 2a and supplementary tables 2 and 3).x axis: normalized pseudotime as defined in fig 2. y axis: relative expression levels.red dashed lines indicate the transitions between predicted regulatory states indicated as in fig 2d and purple dashed lines indicate the calculated activation pseudotime.circle colours: samples of origin as in fig 2b.taking advantage of the invariant lineage (fig 1a) we combined cells corresponding to each branch and created three unidirectional trajectories representing first and second heart and pharyngeal muscle lineages (fig 2ab).the distribution of cells along pseudotime axes corresponded to the times of origin (fig 2c; average pearson correlation coefficient pcc = 0.889) while providing higher-resolution insights into the gene expression dynamics.using constrained hierarchical clus- tering25 we identified 10 putative discrete regulatory states across the cardiopharyngeal trajectories including two multipotent states and eight successive transitions towards fate restriction (fig 2d and supplementary fig 4b).for example the multipotent cardiopha- ryngeal progenitor state (trunk ventral cell tvc) differed mark- edly from subsequent cardiac states along the first cardiac trajectory (fig 2de) and gene expression mapping distinguished ‘primed’ and ‘de novo’-expressed heart markers such as gata4/5/6 and slit1/2/3 respectively (fig 2f).conversely primed pharyngeal muscle mark- ers such as hand-r were downregulated along cardiac trajectories as expected26 (fig 2f and supplementary fig 4c–e).nevertheless 88% (3504/3982) of late-expressed transcripts were already detected in multipotent progenitors (fig 2g) indicating extensive stability of the global transcriptome and thus showing that de novo cell-type- specific gene activation contributes significantly to cell-type-spe- cific programmes (that is the fractions of de novo expressed genes among cell-type-specific markers are greater than expected by chance fisher’s exact test p < 2.2 × 10−16 for both the pan-cardiac- and asm-specific gene sets).the first two reg- ulatory states corresponded to successive generations of multipo- tent cardiopharyngeal progenitors (tvcs and second trunk ventral cells stvcs fig 2de) confirming that asymmetric cell divisions provide the biological basis for these first transitions (fig 1a).to our surprise the majority of newborn pharyngeal muscle precur- sors isolated from 16 hpf larvae clustered with multipotent progeni- tors isolated from 14 hpf embryos (stvcs fig 2de) although they were already expressing ebf (fig 3a) as previously observed using fish1824.for example we used logistic regression to determine that slit1/2/3 is activated at the transition between the multipo- tent and fhp1 states which we confirmed by fish (fig 2f and supplementary fig 2b).]
Summary: Correlation patterns in gene expression dynamics along developmental trajectories, regulatory states, and marker gene activation in single cells.

Text 361
10.1038/s41556-019-0336-z
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 8 | conserved cardiopharyngeal programmes in chordates. a, t-sne plots of mouse scrna-seq data41 (n=1,205 cells) showing tbx1 and dach1 expression patterns. cluster identities are as determined in the original publication. b, expression patterns of dach1, islet1 and nkx2-5 proteins in e9.5 mouse embryos. representative images of four analysed embryos. arrows: islet1+ head muscle progenitor cells in the mesodermal core of the first (pa1, top) and second (pa2, bottom) pharyngeal arches, showing absence of dach1 and nkx2-5 expression. open arrowheads, dach1+, islet1+, nkx2-5− second heart field cells in the dorsal pericardial wall; filled arrowheads, triple nkx2-5+, dach1+, islet1+ cells derived from the second heart field in the outflow tract (oft). note the nkx2-5+, dach1−, islet1− cells in the ventricle (v). scale bar, 100μm. c, aligned structure of ciona and mouse e8.25 cardiopharyngeal cells (n=2291 cells). t-sne plots showing the clustering of ciona and mouse e8.25 cardiopharyngeal cells using conserved markers determined by canonical correlation. bar plots indicate original cell identities, defined in each species independently, as recovered in the clustering using conserved markers. d, t-sne plots of ciona and mouse scrna-seq data as described in c, with the expression patterns of ebf1 and gata4. e, single-cell expression profiles for the top 30 conserved markers in each species separately.']. Reference sentences:[recent scrna-seq analysis of early mesodermal lineages in mice identified a population of pharyngeal mesoderm marked by high levels of both tbx1 and dach1 expression41 (fig 8a).dach1 expression was excluded from the nkx2-5+ ventricle and absent from the isl1+ skeletal muscle progenitor cells in the core mesoderm of the first and second pharyngeal arches (fig 8b and supplementary fig 7) in a manner reminiscent of dach exclusion from the pharyngeal muscles in ciona (fig 6ef and supplementary fig 3a).we used canonical correlation analysis43 to identify genes that separated cardiac and pharyngeal mesoderm cells in both ciona and e8.25 mouse embryos (fig 8ce and supplementary table 4).we then used only the 30 best-correlated genes to recluster scrna-seq data from each species independently and found that these markers suf- ficed to distinguish cardiac and pharyngeal muscle cells in either species revealing a shared transcriptional programme (fig 8ce).for instance gata4 and ebf1 homologues were identified in all three comparisons as discriminat- ing markers that separated cardiac and pharyngeal cells (fig 8c–e supplementary fig 8 and supplementary table 4).]
Patterns of conserved gene expression correlations between cardiac and pharyngeal cells in mouse and ciona single-cell data.

Text 362
10.1093/nar/gkz535
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 4. gene biotype and abundance are correlated to fraction of expressed cells. in general, the fraction of cells in which a gene is expressed is related to the mean expression level of that gene; exceptionally, some low abundant genes are present in a large fraction of cells. rna biotypes that are known to be more cell-type specifically expressed, such as lincrnas, are expressed in fewer cells.']. Reference sentences:[we hypothesize that low abundant genes might be missed because of sampling bias during the sequencing workflow or that lincrnas often low abundant in nature are ex- pressed under specific conditions or stimuli (figure 4) (37).im- portantly a significant fraction of the total rna-seq spe- 0 1 2 3 4 5 0 25 50 75 100 % cells expressing the gene log10(meancpm + 1) antisenserna lncrna miscrna other protein coding pseudogene figure 4.]
Patterns in gene expression abundance and cell specificity are correlated, with some low abundant genes expressed in a large fraction of cells.

Text 363
10.1038/s41586-019-1289-x
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 3 | cells in organoids are generated following a precise and reproducible trajectory and are transcriptionally similar to cells of the human fetal cortex. a, b, pseudotime t-sne plots for the three-month (a) and six-month (b) organoids shown in figs. 1d, 2a, coloured according to cell type (far left) and pseudotime trajectory (centre left; yellow (early) to green (late)). right, contribution of each batch of organoids to the pseudotime plots. n = 3 individual organoids per batch, downsampled to 35,000 cells per time point. c, top, immunohistochemistry for neuronal (map2) and excitatory presynaptic (vglut1) and postsynaptic (psd95) markers in three-month pgp1 and 11a dorsally patterned organoids; co-localization is shown in white (arrows). bottom, vglut1 and psd95 staining; insets, enlarged view of boxed areas. scale bars, 10 μm. d, agreement between cell-type classifications in the human fetal cortex18 and in cell populations of organoids at three months (n = 3 individual organoids per batch). dot size and colour intensity indicate the percentage of cells in each organoid cell type assigned to each human cell type by a random forest classifier. e, spearman correlation coefficients of variable gene expression in human fetal cortex18 with equivalent cell types found in dorsally patterned forebrain organoids (n as in figs. 1d and 2a) and self-patterned whole-brain organoids3 (n = 19 individual organoids, 4 independent batches).']. Reference sentences:[despite the long culture period molecular markers of apoptosis and hypoxia remained low (extended data fig 3a–e).confirming neuronal maturation co-localization of the pre- and post-synaptic markers vglut1 and psd95 suggested the presence of excitatory synapses at this time point (fig 3c).organoid cells at both three and six months were predominantly assigned to the correspond- ing endogenous cell class indicating that their transcriptional profiles were similar to endogenous cells (fig 3d and extended data fig 4b).finally scrublet v.0.139 was used to assess the effect of droplets that may have contained more than one cell with an expected doublet rate of 0.1 and a score threshold of 0.39 chosen based on histo- grams of simulated doublet scores (extended data fig 3f).to calculate correlations between cell types (as in fig 3e) we assigned cell types to cells in ref.]
Summary: Correlation of gene expression between human fetal cortex and organoid cell types, confirming transcriptional similarity.

Text 364
10.1016/j.cell.2019.05.006
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure s1. parameter selection and fast updating, related to figure 1 (a) comparison of reconstructed pbmc 10x gene expression values for inmf versus nmf, pca, and scvi (spearman correlation indicated). (b) comparison of reconstructed values and original gene expression values. comparison calculated for random 1% sample of non-zero values for (a) and (b). mean squared error values are displayed for each method. (c and d) comparison of objective function value as a function of running time for our als implementation of inmf and the original multiplicative update algorithm, for the (c) pbmc datasets and the (d) human-mouse pancreas datasets. our als implementation converged in less time than the original algorithm on these datasets for two different values of k. (e) comparison of fast updating strategy versus simple recalculation for changing k from 22 to 12. (f) comparison of fast updating strategy versus simple recalculation for changing l from 22 to 12. (g and h) fast updating for (g) subsetting the data and (h) adding new data. (i and j) parameter selection heuristics for (i) pbmc dataset and (j) pancreas dataset. error bars represent 95% confidence intervals from twenty random inmf initializations for kl divergence plots and ten random initializations for lambda-alignment plots.']. Reference sentences:[]
Summary: Correlation patterns between reconstructed and original gene expression values using different methods and parameter selection strategies in single-cell data analysis.

Text 365
10.1126/science.aas9536
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 3. logic of cell fate selection for sensory-autonomic bifurcation. (a) schematic overview of the sensory-autonomic split in nc differentiation. (b) branch-specific (sensory versus autonomic) genes classified as activated early (before split) and late (after split). right: example of an early (pou4f1) and a late (neurod1) sensory-specific gene. vertical line marks predicted time of up-regulation. time of up-regulation of all genes can be found in data s3 and s4. colors encode branches [as in (a)]. (c) average expression pattern of early and late branch-specific modules. early and late modules are set of genes activated before or after the bifurcation. (d) scatter plots show average expression of sensory and autonomic modules in each cell. left: early competing modules show gradual coactivation, followed by selective up-regulation of one fate-specific module and down-regulation of another. right: late modules show almost mutually exclusive up-regulation. colors encode tree branches. (e) bifurcation point is characterized by correlated expression of genes within modules, and repulsion of competing modules. left: probability of a cell proximity to the sensory-autonomic bifurcation point shown (darker colors corresponding to higher probability). right: average correlation of each early sensory- or autonomic-specific gene (points) with the genes from the sensory- (x axis) and autonomic-specific (y axis) modules among cells around the bifurcation point. genes that have low average correlation with']. Reference sentences:[coactivation of alternative programs and biasing precede fate commitment to investigate the process of cell fate commit- ment we examined how transcriptional modules associated with alternative cell fates assemble and compete around decision points focusing initially on the first bifurcation separating sen- sory and autonomic branches (fig 3a).we ap- proximated fate-specific modules by sets of genes selectively up-regulated in one branch compared to another (fig 3 b and c).whereas some fate- specific genes are up-regulated after the bifurca- tion point (late genes 45 sensory 36 autonomic) others show earlier up-regulation in the progen- itor branch before the actual bifurcation point (early genes 53 sensory 86 autonomic) (fig 3b and data files s3 and s4).for example neurod1 thought to be a master regulator of sensory fate is induced late in the sensory branch whereas another sensory tf pou4f1 is up-regulated earlier during delamination in a manner similar to that of neurog2 (fig 3b).we observed that early modules of competing cellular fates are coex- pressed in progenitor cells and exhibit gradual coactivation as the cells progress toward the bifurcation point followed by selective up- regulation of one module and down-regulation of another after the bifurcation point (fig 3c).by contrast late-competing modules show mutu- ally exclusive activation in their correspond- ing branches without coexpression in individual cells consistent with commitment to a partic- ular fate (fig 3d).for the cells positioned around the actual bi- furcation point the transcriptional bias toward one of the possible fates manifests itself as a pro- nounced negative correlation between the com- peting gene modules (fig 3e).we find that as cells move toward the first bifurcation point following the initial coactivation stage the degree of transcriptional coordination within each module increases and antagonistic expres- sion of the competing modules becomes more apparent (fig 3 e and f).rather we observe broad expression shifts between genes of the competing fate-specific modules (fig 3f).when considering more homogeneous cell populations within the branches following the bifurcation point correlation of genes within the module becomes relatively low indicating that regulatory interactions between genes such as correlations induced by stochastic covariation of a tf and its target genes are not apparent in such data (36) (fig 3f).the results show that early correlated subsets of modules specific to either sensory or autonomic fate can be statistically distinguished at the delamination stage but not in the pre-emt neural crest (fig 3g and data files s5 and s6).overall we observe three primary phases of cell fate decision formalized as a sequence of initial coactivation gradual biasing and com- mitment phases (fig 3h).similar to fig 3f the cells were arranged by pseudotime and binned in groups of 50 cells (upper panels) to estimate intra- and intermodule correla- tions between the mes- enchymal and neuronal (sensory autonomic) gene modules from e9.5 trunk ncc analysis (lower panels).]
Correlated gene expression patterns in sensory-autonomic fate decision, with early coactivation, gradual biasing, and commitment phases.

Text 366
10.1038/s41587-019-0150-y
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 4 | scdam&t-seq enables in silico cell sorting and reconstruction of corresponding cell-type-specific gene-regulatory landscapes. a, ica on damexpressing mescs cultured in 2i (orange) or serum (blue) conditions. b, dna accessibility profiles in 2i and serum conditions of in silico populations (top track) and single cells (signal binarized to high (oe≥1) as black and low (oe<1) as white). the lower panel shows mesc hic data34 at the same locus, displayed with the 3d genome browser35. c, fold change in the dam signal (reads per million, rpm) between 2i and serum conditions for genes that show statistically significant upregulation (orange), downregulation (blue) or are unaffected (de, green) in 2i conditions compared to serum. box plots indicate the 25th and 75th percentile (box), median (line) and 1.5 times the iqr past the 25th and 75th percentiles (whiskers). p values indicate the result of a two-sided t-test against a mean of 0. n=158, 577 and 6,056 genes, in boxes from left-to-right, respectively. d, average log2oe signal over all ring1b chip-seq peaks obtained with chip-seq (left) and scdam&t-seq (right) in 2-kb bins. e, signal (log2oe) over the four hox gene clusters for ring1b chipseq and ring1b damid. in d and e, population chip-seq data were normalized for the corresponding input control; ring1b damid data represent an in silico population of 62 single cells and were normalized with an in silico population dam sample. f, relationship between allelic bias in transcription and damid on chromosome x. spearman’s ρ and p values (two-sided test, determined by bootstrap) are indicated. cells are indicated in red when both the transcriptional and damid allelic biases deviated more than expected based on the somatic chromosomes (see methods). cells marked as a star fell outside the shown data range; the cell marked as a star in the serum condition is suspected of having lost one chromosome x allele and was excluded from the spearman correlation. g, average allelic damid profiles for cells that had a transcriptional bias on chromosome x toward neither allele (top), toward 129/sv (middle) or toward cast/eij (bottom) for chromosome x.']. Reference sentences:[the observed periodicity of 174 base pairs (bp) is in agreement with the reported spacing of nucleosomes in human cells2930 (supplementary fig 4a).this increased sensitivity of dam in measuring lowly transcribed gene regions may be attributed to the ability of dam to mark gene-units encompassing both active gene promoters (marked by h3k4me3) and gene bodies (marked by h3k36me3) (supplementary fig 4b) whereas dnase i has been reported to primarily detect active pro- moters31.scdam&t-seq and scnmt-seq display similar nucleosome positioning characteristics at dnase i hypersensitivity sites with a 30-fold shallower sequenc- ing depth for scdam&t-seq (supplementary fig 4c).consistently the up down not de –0.6 –0.4 –0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 log2fc dam(2i / serum) nn = 160 nn = 591 n = 6144 n –2 0 2 –2 0 2 day 0 –2 0 2 ρ = –0.53 p = 4.7 × 10–12 day 3 log2transcripts (129 / cast) log2ring1b (129 / cast) 0 1 rpkm no chrx-inactivation (n = 82) 129 / sv cast / eij 0 1 rpkm 129 / sv chrx inactivated (n = 32) 0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 chromosome x (mb) 0 1 rpkm cast / eij chrx inactivated (n = 32) density 0 5 hoxa chip-seq (bulk) damid (n = 62) hoxb hoxc hoxd 52.0 52.4 chr6 (mb) 0 2 log2(oe) 96.0 96.5 chr11 (mb) 102.7 103.2 chr15 (mb) 74.5 74.9 chr2 (mb) –10 kb peak +10 kb 0.5 1.0 1.5 chip-seq (bulk) –10 kb peak +10 kb 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 damid (n = 62) chromosome 6 (mb) 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 2i peg10 serum 2i mappability serum 3 4 5 6 7 rpkm b a c genes d e f g log2(oe) log2(oe) p(µ = 0) = 3.4 × 10–7 1.5 × 10–10 0.152 ρ = –0.30 pp = 2 × 10–2 serum 2i component 1 fig 4 | scdam&t-seq enables in silico cell sorting and reconstruction of corresponding cell-type-specific gene-regulatory landscapes.scdam&t-seq derived transcriptomics were sep- arated into two distinct clusters based on independent component analysis (ica fig 4a).peg10 a gene strongly upregulated under serum conditions showed increased accessibility at the tss and along the gene body (fig 4b).at the gene level differ- ential upregulation in either 2i or serum conditions is also associ- ated with increased dna accessibility (fig 4c and supplementary fig 7c).in undifferentiated mescs the cumulative single-cell ring1b scdam&t-seq data are strongly enriched over ring1b binding sites detected by chip-seq (fig 4d).similarly the patterns of enrichment on hox genes are very com- parable (fig 4e) and genome-wide scdam&t-seq and chip-seq correlate well (supplementary fig 7f).the allelic bias in transcription correlates with increased ring1b levels on the transcriptionally repressed allele (fig 4fg) a pattern that is not observed for autosomes of the same cells (supplementary fig 7h).a.c. performed the analysis of supplementary fig 4d and exploratory analyses together with s.s.d.for analyses comparing allelic signals counts with ‘ambiguous’ genotype were discarded (fig 4fg and supplementary fig 6 and 7gh).the ica separating 2i and serum samples is shown in fig 4a.the detected number of genes per cell for both methods is shown in supplementary fig 4d.panels in fig 4a consider genes with a false discovery rate smaller than 5% and an absolute log2fc greater than 2.0 as either up- or downregulated.for fig 4c genes with absolute log2fc smaller than 1.3 and unadjusted p value greater than 0.5 were considered as ‘not differentially expressed’.figures with associated raw data: figure 1b figure 1c figure 1d figure 1e figure 2a figure 2b figure 2c figure 2d figure 2e figure 2f figure 3a figure 3b figure 3c figure 3d figure 4a figure 4b figure 4c figure 4d figure 4e figure 4f figure 4g figure s1a figure s1b figure s1c figure s1d figure s1e figure s1f figure s1g figure s2a figure s2b figure s2c figure s2d figure s2e figure s2f figure s2g figure s2h figure s3b figure s4a figure s4b figure s4c figure s4d figure s5a figure s5b figure s5c figure s5d figure s5e figure s5f figure s6a figure s6b figure s6c figure s6d figure s7a figure s7b figure s7c figure s7d figure s7e figure s7f figure s7g figure s7h figure 7i field-specific reporting please select the best fit for your research.]
Patterns of gene expression and DNA accessibility correlate with cell type-specific gene-regulatory landscapes.

Text 367
10.1038/s41590-019-0398-x
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 3 | focused analysis of kidney myeloid cells. a, five clusters of myeloid cells were identified. the heatmaps show the expression of either canonical lineage markers (top) or genes differentially upregulated in each cluster (bottom). b, the results of classifying the kidney myeloid cells by correlating their gene expression to a set of ten reference clusters (mono1–mono4, dc1–dc6), taken from villani et al.12. for each of the five clusters identified in our data, the bars denote the percentage of cells most similar to each of the reference clusters. the percentage of cells mapped to the most frequent reference cluster in each case is specified on the corresponding bar. c, the distribution of highest pearson correlation values per kidney myeloid cell, when compared with the reference clusters in villani et al. the percentage of cells in each cluster for which the correlation score was above the assignability threshold is specified above the plot, followed by the number of cells in the cluster (n); the assignability threshold itself is denoted by the horizontal dashed line. d, the cells of clusters cm0 (red), cm1 (purple) and cm4 (blue), presented in two dimensions using diffusion maps. the arrow represents the direction of the putative transition between these three clusters, as explained in the text. e, the change in the inflammatory response score, calculated as the average scaled expression of several pro-inflammatory genes, along the trajectory shown in d; ‘pseudotime’ represents the ordering of the cells along this trajectory. the violin plots (shades) show the distribution of expression levels in equally spaced intervals along the pseudotime axis (and do not directly correspond to cell clusters). f, same as e, but with regard to a set of genes associated with phagocytosis. cdcs, conventional dendritic cells.']. Reference sentences:[focused analysis of the 466 cells in myeloid clusters c4 and c6 revealed 5 finer clusters (clusters cm0–cm4; fig 3a and supplementary fig 3a–c).we determined their putative identity by comparing their global gene expression patterns with those of published reference monocyte/dendritic cell (dc) clusters identified in blood samples of healthy individuals using scrna-seq12 (fig 3bc) and by the expression of canonical lineage markers.cluster cm3 was closest to cd1c+ dcs (reference clusters dc2 and dc3) or clec9a+ dcs (reference cluster dc1) in accordance with the expression of the canonical dc markers cd1c and flt3 (supplementary fig 3a) and the lack of expres- sion of monocyte markers cd14 and cd16.we next determined whether the pattern of gene expression in each cluster could indicate functional capabilities (supplementary fig 3a).this cluster demonstrated low expression of cd14 cd16 cx3cr1 and ccr2 and no clear similarity to the published reference clusters of peripheral myeloid subsets (fig 3bc).dimensionality reduction using either diffusion maps21 (fig 3d) or t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding22 (tsne; fig 2a) indicated possible transitions between the three clusters of infiltrating monocytes/macrophages with cm1 linking cm0 and cm4.furthermore since the cells in cluster cm0 tended to be the most similar to peripheral blood cd16+ monocytes while the cells in cluster cm4 were the least similar (fig 3c) the suggested progres- sion is from an inflammatory blood monocyte (cm0) to a phago- cytic (cm1) and then an alternatively activated (cm4) phenotype.overall a general downregulation of inflammatory genes and a concurrent upregula- tion of genes associated with phagocytosis (supplementary table 6) was observed along this trajectory (fig 3ef).we used drop- let-based scrna-seq yielding 1411 sorted high-quality myeloid blood cells that included a subpopulation of cd16+ monocytes (supplementary fig 3g).as expected the vast majority of peripheral blood cd16+ cells were most similar to the cm0 cluster with a few cells mapped to either cm1 or cm3 and no cell mapped to cm4 or cm2 (supplementary fig 3h).to determine whether the hypothesized differentiation begins before entering the kidney we examined the relative upregulation of phagocytosis-associated genes in cluster cm1 compared with cm0 in both blood and kidney (supplementary fig 3i–j).]
Patterns of gene expression correlations with reference clusters, indicating potential functional capabilities and transitions between cell states in myeloid cells.

Text 368
10.1038/s41590-019-0403-4
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 3 | tox gene module distinguishes progenitor-like cd8+ t cells from memory precursor cells (experimental setup described in fig 2). a, enrichment (log2 p values) of the progenitor-like gene signature in each cell (n=16,042 cells) determined by a one-sided fisher’s exact test. left panel: t-sne plots with color-coded p values. right panel: percentages of cells in each cluster, as defined in fig 2c, with p values above (red) or below (turquoise) 0.05. b, heatmap of the top 40 genes expressed in each cluster. cells are from cluster 5 (n=1,357 cells), 7 (n=834 cells) or 10 (n=116 cells), as defined in fig 2c. the columns correspond to the cells; the rows correspond to the genes. cells are grouped by clusters. the color scale is based on a z-score distribution from −2 (purple) to 2 (yellow). c, differentially expressed genes between cells in cluster 10 (n=116 cells) and 7 (n=834 cells), illustrated by volcano plots (pink, upregulated in cluster 10; blue, upregulated in cluster 7). the x axis represents the average log fold changes; the y axis presents −log10 adjusted p values. a two-sided wilcoxon rank-sum test was used. d, violin plots of tox expression in cells from clusters 5 (n=1,357 cells), 7 (n=834 cells) or 10 (n=116 cells). the violin represents the probability density at each value; each dot represents one cell. e, a gene coexpression network of the scrnaseq data described in fig 2 (n=16,042 cells) was constructed by weighted correlation network analysis. the heatmap shows the topological overlap matrix among all genes used in the analysis. the darker color represents a higher overlap. the hierarchical clustering and module assignment of genes are shown along the left side and top. the numbers indicate module saddlebrown (29) and module tan (12). f,g, left panels: enrichment (log2 p values) of genes in module 29 (saddlebrown, f) or 12 (tan, g) in each cell (n=16,042 cells) was determined by a one-sided fisher’s exact test and is illustrated by the t-sne plots. right panels: percentages of cells (n=16,042 cells) in each cluster, as defined in fig 2c, with p values above (red) or below (turquoise) 0.05.']. Reference sentences:[although the progenitor-like signature pre- viously identified6 was enriched in most progenitor-like cells (clus- ter 10) it was also enriched in approximately 60% of cluster 7 cells a subset with memory precursor cell characteristics and in approxi- mately 30% of cluster 5 cells (fig 3a and supplementary fig 3a).among the top genes upregu- lated in cluster 10 were the ribosomal genes cd200 pdcd4 and tox (fig 3b–d).forty-nine modules were identified and color-coded including a module containing genes such as tcf7 tnfsf8 and id3 (module 29 saddlebrown) and a separate module containing tox (module 12 tan) (fig 3e supplementary fig 3c and supplementary tables 4 and 5).module 29 exhibited strong enrichment in cells from cluster 5 7 and 10 similar to the tcf7 expression pattern (fig 3f and supplementary fig 3d) whereas most cells with enrichment of module 12 fell in cluster 10 (fig 3g and supplementary fig 3e).to confirm these findings we isolated day 7 cl13 progenitor-like (tim3loblimp-1lo) day 7 cl13 terminally exhausted (tim3hiblimp-1hi) day 7 arm memory pre- cursor (klrg1lo) day 7 arm short-lived effector (klrg1hi) day 4.5 arm and day 4.5 cl13 p14 cells for bulk rna-seq (supplementary fig 3fg).consistent with the scrna-seq data tox was most abun- dantly expressed in day 7 cl13 progenitor-like cells (supplementary fig 3h).differential expression of tox protein was confirmed by flow cytometric analysis (supplementary fig 3ij).fg gsea by clusterprofiler illustrating the enrichment of module 12 as defined in fig 3e in tox-overexpressing versus control progenitor-like (f) or terminally exhausted (g) p14 cells.]
Correlation patterns between gene modules and cell clusters, with enrichment of specific genes in progenitor-like cells and distinct modules.

Text 369
10.1038/s41590-019-0425-y
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 4 | mass spectrometry analysis separates the ilc3–ilc1 spectrum and nk cells. a, the visne analysis of tonsil nkp44+ cells based on 36 selected markers and colored by intensity of expression. each plot shows expression of the indicated cell surface marker. populations corresponding to ilc3a, ilc3b, ilc1b and ilc1a are delineated in the cd127 plot. cell subsets that lack cd103, but express cd94, nkg2a and cd127, are indicated as ‘others’. b, heat maps show graded expression of the indicated markers in the ilc subsets. two donors analyzed in parallel on the same day are shown for consistency. c, the visne map of nkp44+cd103+ cells shows three clusters in which the degree of expression of cd127 and ccr6 inversely correlates with that of cd94. the visne analysis also identifies a small ilc1 cluster expressing cd16. data are representative of six donors. cells were gated based on nkp44 and cd161 (a,b) or nkp44, cd161 and cd103 (c) before running visne. contaminating cd3+cd19+fcεr+trem1+cd14+ cells were excluded by manual gating.']. Reference sentences:[six major clusters of cells were identified with ilc3a and ilc1a distinguishable at the opposite sides of the cd127 t-sne map (fig 4a).ilc3b and ilc1b subsets were identifiable within the cd103+ population based on expression gradients of cd127 and cd94 (fig 4a).key cell surface markers (such as cd196 and cd117) decreased from ilc3a–ilc3b to ilc1b whereas other markers (such as nkg2a) increased from ilc3a–ilc3b to ilc1b– ilc1a (fig 4ab).ilc3a contained both cd39+ and cd39− cells (fig 4a).one was characterized by concomitant expression of cd127 cd117 cd94 and nkg2a and the second expressed cd94 nkg2a and cd16 (fig 4a).these features suggested that they most probably corresponded to blood cd56bright and cd56dim nk cells (fig 4a)2526.the ilc3b and ilc1b subsets were even more clearly demarcated when the analysis was restricted to cd103+ cells (fig 4c).most ilc3a-derived clones contained il-22+ cells ifn-γ+ cells and a few cells producing both cytokines (fig 6a and see supplementary fig 4).the percentage of il-22+ cells progressively decreased from ilc3a-derived clones to ilc1a-derived clones whereas the percentage of ifn-γ+ cells fol- lowed the opposite pattern (fig 6b and see supplementary fig 4).]
Patterns of marker expression in different cell clusters, with correlation between markers such as cd127, ccr6, cd94, and cd16.

Text 370
10.1084/jem.20190249
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 3. single-cell transcriptomic analysis reveals previously uncharacterized trm subsets. (a) tsne visualization of ∼12,000 live and singlet-gated cd14−cd19−cd20−cd4−cd56−cd45+cd3+cd8+ single-cell transcriptomes obtained from 12 tumors and 6 matched normal lung samples. each symbol represents a cell; color indicates protein expression of cd103 detected by flow cytometry. (b) seurat clustering of cells in a, identifying nine clusters. (c) cells from tumor and lung were randomly down-sampled to equivalent numbers of cells. left: distribution of trm-enriched clusters in tumor and lung. right: pie chart representing the relative proportions of cells in each trm cluster. (d) expression of transcripts previously identified as up-regulated in the bulk tumor trm population (fig 2 a) by each cluster; each column represents the average expression in a particular cluster. (e) breakdown of cell type and tissue localization of cells defined as being in cluster 1 (shown in light purple in b and d). (f) violin plots of expression of example tumor trm genes in each trm-enriched cluster (square below indicates the cluster type) and non-trm cells; shape represents the distribution of expression among cells and color represents the seuratnormalized average expression counts. (g) cell-state hierarchy maps generated by monocle2 bioinformatic modeling of the trm clusters. in the center plot, each dot represents a cell colored according to seurat-assigned cluster. surrounding panels show relative seurat-normalized expression of the indicated genes. (h) cluster analysis of the location in pca space for cells. each cluster was randomly down sampled to the equivalent size of the smallest cluster (n = 135 cells per cluster, 675 total). the correlation method was spearman, and the dataset was clustered with average linkage.']. Reference sentences:[analysis of the ∼12000 single-cell transcriptomes revealed five clusters (ma- terials and methods) of trm cells and four clusters of non-trm cells with varying frequency per donor highlighting the im- portance of studying multiple patient samples (fig 3 a and b; and fig s2 a–c).among the five trm clusters clusters 1–3 (light purple purple and blue respectively) contained a greater pro- portion of the tumor trm population while clusters 4 and 5 (green and red) contained more lung trm cells (fig 3 c).most strikingly clusters 1–3 contained very few lung trm cells (fig 3 c).in agreement with that conclusion cells in cluster 1 (light purple) expressed high levels of the 25 cell cycle–related tumor trm-enriched transcripts (fig 3 d; macosko et al. 2015) indi- cating that the enrichment of cell cycle transcripts in the bulk tumor trm population was contributed by this relatively small subset.the majority of cells in this cycling cluster were from the tumor trm population (fig 3 e).these cells as well as those in the larger cluster 2 (purple) were highly enriched for other prominent tumor trm-enriched transcripts like havcr2 (tim-3) including those encoding products that could confer additional functionality such as cd39 (ganesan et al. 2017) cxcl13 (bindea et al. 2013) and ccl3 (castellino et al. 2006; fig 3 f) consistent with recent reports (guo et al. 2018; savas et al. 2018) but with a noteworthy caveat that transcript expression does not necessarily reflect functionality.confirming this idea cell-state hierarchy maps of all trm cells constructed using monocle2 (trapnell et al. 2014; materials and methods) revealed that cells in clus- ter 2 were most similar to the cycling trm cells (cluster 1 fig 3 g).additionally when we performed hierarchical clus- tering (materials and methods) of these cells we noted that the proliferating cluster 1 clustered more with cells assigned to cluster 2 than the other trm clusters (fig 3 h).applying unbiased differential expression analysis (model-based analysis of single-cell tran- scriptomics; mast) we found that among the tumor-infiltrating ctls tcf7 expression was enriched in the ccr7 (cd197)- and sell (cd62l)-expressing non-trm subset likely to reflect cen- tral memory cells (fig 3 b and s2 e; light orange) with no significant enrichment observed in any of the trm clusters non-trm (cd103−) ctls (marked in red font in the venn diagram).because of their close relationship with cycling trm cells (fig 3 d g and h) we focused our analysis on the trm cells in cluster 2.]
Patterns related to correlation between cell clusters and gene expression levels in tumor and lung trm populations were analyzed.

Text 371
10.7554/eLife.43966
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 5. evaluation of imputation using the sda model. (a) here, we illustrate the ability of sda-based imputation (materials and methods) of gene expression values in single cells to improve the signal/noise ratio of expression, for seven genes with strong developmental regulation. note in the imputed expression ‘dropouts’ at 0 are recovered and there is less outlying expression. (b) to test the utility of sda-based imputation, we created separate training/test data (materials and methods). from the training data we constructed seven predictors of gene expression in the test data for each cell (‘unimputed’ using the training data directly, ‘mean cell’ using the mean across all cells, matrix factorisation approaches sda, pca, ica, nnmf, and a dedicated imputation approach, magic). we compared the ability of each predictor to rank the gene expression in the test data for each cell, quantified as the area under the rank prediction accuracy curve (rpac). shown is an example rpac for these predictors when applied to the test data for a single cell. (c) comparison of aucs (area under the rpac curve) for all cells using various methods (same color scheme as part b). (d) sda produces multiple components for spermatogonia. shown are zoomed in versions of the t-sne projection (with full t-sne for context): cells are colored by expression using a three channel ternary color scheme with the amount of blue, green, red representing the respective expression levels of lin28a, nanos1, and gfra1. by assigning only one component for undifferentiated spermatogonia, nmf predicts gfra1 and lin28a are expressed in the same cells resulting in a pink hue (see also figure 5—figure supplement 1b, no correlation for sda component 50 gfra1 stem cells). for selection of component see materials and methods. (e) imputed expression of x chromosomal gene rhox2h from either the sda or nnmf decomposition, split into cells we know to be either wt or hormad-/- genotype. nnmf predicts a peak in rhox2h expression even in the wt cells, in which x chromosome activation due to hormad1 ko does not occur. (f) nnmf does not assign separate components for the innate and adaptive immune cells (see also figure 5—figure supplement 1b, no correlation for the sda component 3 lymphocytes). nnmf does not predict high expression of the adaptive immune cell marker cd3g (t-cell surface glycoprotein cd3 gamma chain), and when it predicts any expression it increases linearly with the innate figure 5 continued on next page']. Reference sentences:[nonetheless sda imputation is able to estimate expression of individual genes even when in many cells zero reads are observed (figure 5a).sda imputation outperforms approaches using the raw data for essentially all cells in the test data (figure 5b&c figure 5—fig- ure supplement 1c).while providing the most sparse representation (figure 3c) sda still imputes equally well compared to other matrix factorizations and to magic (van dijk et al. 2018) (figure 5c figure 5—figure supplement 1a).component 31 represents undifferenti- ated spermatogonia expressing zbtb16 (aka plzf) (buaas et al. 2004) and foxo1 (goertz et al. 2011) while component 50 splits these into two subpopulations one expressing gfra1 (he et al. 2007) and glis3 (kang et al. 2016) and the other nanos3 (suzuki et al. 2009) lin28a (zheng et al. 2009) and foxf1 (figure 5d).nnmf does not predict high expression of the adaptive immune cell marker cd3g (t-cell surface glycoprotein cd3 gamma chain) and when it predicts any expression it increases linearly with the innate figure 5 continued on next page jung et al.here we find that with respect to sex chromosome transcription the genetically haploid cells are predominantly phenotypically diploid (figure 6a & b and figure 6—figure supplement 1a) sug- gesting that cytoplasmic mrna is efficiently shared consistent with studies of individual genes figure 5 continued immune cell marker csf1r (macrophage colony-stimulating factor 1 receptor or cd115).we show example genes from 3p and 50n in figure 5d and f. nnmf analysis was performed using the nnlm r package (lin and boutros 2019) with 50 com- ponents and a stop criterion of 10=5.]
Summary: sda imputation improves gene expression signal/noise ratio, outperforming other methods, and identifies distinct cell subpopulations based on gene expression patterns.

Text 372
10.1016/j.celrep.2019.05.090
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 3. alternative splicing of neurexins correlates with neurogenic origin (a) pca plot shows clear separation of cell classes on the basis of developmental marker-gene expression (neurod1 through htr3a). cell types were as published by the allen institute (tasic et al., 2018) and grouped into classes based on the first identifier of their cell type labels. for cell type-level plots, see figure s5. background color represents linear partitioning-based support vector machine (svm) classification. (b) pca plot shows clear separation of cell classes on the basis of neurexin alternative splicing (nrxn1 and nrxn3, ass1–ass6). (c) pca plot based on secreted neurexin ligands.']. Reference sentences:[we performed principal-component analysis (pca) on the basis of expression of neurod1 neurod2 lhx6 satb1 sox6 htr3a and prox1 in each cell type which as expected separately clustered lhx6+-in prox1+-in and pc classes (figure 3a; figure s5).interestingly the same pca patterns emerged when using neurexin alternative splicing levels (relative amounts of in and out for the total of 12 alternative splicing sites of nrxn1 and nrxn3; figure 3b; fig- ure s5) which demonstrated that neurexins correlate extremely well with developmental markers at predicting developmental figure 2.finally we performed pca on the basis of secreted neurexin ligand expression which despite showing cell type-specific expression patterns (figure 2) did not show a clear separation of classes (figure 3c; figure s5).discussion by analyzing neurexin profiles in single embryonic and adult neurons we show that neurexin alternative splicing profiles are remarkably similar within but different between mature −2 0 2 developmental markers pca1 : 0.50 −2 −1 0 1 2 3 developmental markers pca2 : 0.36 −5 0 5 nrxn alternative splicing pca1 : 0.39 −4 −2 0 2 4 6 nrxn alternative splicing pca2 : 0.18 l2/3 l4 l5 l6 l6b lamp5 serpinf1 sncg vip sst pv lamp5 lhx6 −4 −2 0 2 secreted nrxn ligands4 pca1 : 0.21 −2 −1 0 1 2 3 4 5 secreted nrxn ligands pca2 : 0.16 a b c pcs prox1 + lhx6 + figure 3.]
Neurexin alternative splicing patterns correlate with cell classes based on developmental markers.

Text 373
10.1038/s41586-019-1362-5
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 5a–c, supplementary table 9). facs analysis confirmed that only a subpopulation of old qnscs and ansc/npcs showed increased stat1 staining (extended data fig 5d). old nscs therefore exhibit a heterogeneous interferon-γ response. we next determined whether the subpopulation of old nscs that experiences a strong interferon-γ response differs from its nonresponsive counterpart. to isolate this subpopulation, we searched for a surface marker that correlated with the interferon-γ response. we identified bst2 (encoded by bst2; also known as tetherin in humans),']. Reference sentences:[]
Summary: Identification of a subpopulation of cells based on correlation with interferon-γ response using surface marker BST2.

Text 374
10.1016/j.neuron.2019.06.011
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 8. partitioned heritability analysis demonstrates enrichment of heritability in specific brain traits and neuropsychiatric diseases in diverse cell types (a) schematic showing the approach to identifying regulatory elements (res) for specific cell types and assessing enrichment for specific brain traits. res of genes enriched in specific cell types are identified by chromatin accessibility correlation between the promoter of the gene and the other accessible peaks within 1 mb. the set of promoter and distal re peaks are then tested for enrichment in snps associated with brain traits and neuropsychiatric disease using partitioned heritability by ld score regression. (b) heatmap showing significant partitioned heritability enrichment for specific brain traits and neuropsychiatric disorders in different cell populations. color indicates the partitioned heritability enrichment. numbers are the fdr-corrected p values. references for each gwas are in table s8. we did not observe enrichment of irritable bowel syndrome (ibd) or finger whorl variants in the regulatory elements of any cortical-derived cell types, supporting the cell-type specificity of gene regulation. (c) for selected gwas, bar plots indicate the fdr-corrected significance or the enrichment (right) of partitioned heritability. red vertical line indicates the fdrsignificance threshold (p value 0.05). error bars represent se. n, gwas sample size.']. Reference sentences:[partitioned heritability of cell−specific regulatory elements in developing human cortex 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 enrichment vrg org pgs pgg2m ip exn exm exm-u exdp1 exdp2 inmge incge opc end per mic 32 (1.5) 38 (1.7) 11 (1.9) 10 (1.5) 27 (2.7) 16 (2.1) 23 (4.2) 14 (2.3) 26 (1.9) 8.5 (1.5) 24 (2) 28 (1.5) 8.8 (1.5) 11 (2.1) 13 (2.4) 14 (1.5) 11 (1.5) 18 (2.4) 12 (1.5) 11 (2.5) 9.5 (1.8) 19 (1.4) 13 (2.3) 10 (1.4) 12 (2) 52 (1.8) 18 (2.2) 24 (1.9) 25 (2.3) 16 (2.1) 17 (3.4) 11 (1.5) 28 (1.4) 7.7 (1.3) other nd neuropsychiatric cog vol icv edu iq adhd asd bd schizophrenia ds mdd neuroticism swb epilepsy insomnia ad pd ibd whorls_index whorls_thumb rg mp ip en in o m e p aaa aaa aaa aaa cell type enriched gene (scrnaseq) chromatin accessibility correlation (atac-seq) promoter re significant gwas snp human mid-gestation cortex atac-seq schizophrenia n = 105318 p.fdr enrichment schizophrenia n = 105318 enrichment educational attainment n = 328917 educational attainment n = 328917 intracranial volume n = 26577 intracranial volume n = 26577 mic per end opc incge inmge exdp2 exdp1 exm-u exm exn ip pgg2m pgs org vrg mic per end opc incge inmge exdp2 exdp1 exm-u exm exn ip pgg2m pgs org vrg mic per end opc incge inmge exdp2 exdp1 exm-u exm exn ip pgg2m pgs org vrg 0 1 2 3 4 5 -20 0 20 40 60 a c b figure 8.reg- ulatory elements associated with genes enriched in specific cell types were then used for regulatory element metrics (figures 5a–5h) and partitioned heritability analyses (figure 8).]
Patterns of correlation between regulatory elements and gene expression enriched in specific cell types related to brain traits and neuropsychiatric diseases.

Text 375
10.1186/s13059-019-1739-7
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 3 development and benchmarking of cellsius. a schematic overview of cellsius. starting from an initial assignment of n cells in m clusters (i), within each cluster, genes with a bimodal distribution are identified (ii) and only genes with cluster-specific expression are retained (iii). among the candidate genes, sets with correlated expression patterns are identified by graph-based clustering (iv). cells are assigned to subgroups based on their average expression of each gene set (v). b, c performance comparison of cellsius to giniclust2 and raceid3 in detecting cells from sub-clusters and their signatures. b recall, precision, and true negative rate (tnr) with regard to the detection of rare cells in synthetic data when varying the number of rare cells from 2 (0.2%) to 100 (10%) c recall, precision, and true negative rate (tnr) with regard to the detection of outlier genes (gene signature) in synthetic data when varying and the number of signature genes from 2 to 100']. Reference sentences:[cellsius takes as input the expression values of n cells grouped into m clus- ters (fig 3a).in contrast gini- clust2 did not identify any rare cell populations and raceid3 recalled only ~ 50% of true positives (fig 3b top panel).raceid3 had a low tnr (mean = 0.95 sd = 0.01) resulting in low precision (mean = 0.1 sd = 0.1) (fig 3b middle and bot- tom panel).in comparison to cellsius giniclust2 showed a poor performance (fig 3c top panel) consistent with failing to detect rare cell population.whereas both precision and tnr were 1.0 for cellsius raceid3 had a low tnr (0.5) and consequently a low precision (mean = 0.012 sd = 0.007) (fig 3c top and bottom panels).in summary using synthetic data we showed an in- creased sensitivity and specificity of our algorithm for rare cell type identification and outlier gene identifi- cation compared to giniclust2 and raceid3 (fig 3b c) and demonstrated robustness to parameter choices (additional file 1: figure s3).cellsius cellsius detects cell subpopulations and their gene signatures (fig 3a).]
Patterns of correlated gene expression within cell subgroups are identified and used for cell classification and gene signature detection.

Text 376
10.1186/s13059-019-1739-7
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 1 generation of a scrna-seq dataset with known cellular composition. a schematic illustration of the experimental setup. eight human cell lines were individually profiled by bulk rna-seq and mixed in four batches containing mixtures of two or three cell lines each for scrna-seq profiling. correlation of the single-cell to bulk expression profiles was used for cell type assignment as described in the methods section. b visualization of correlations between single-cell and bulk expression profiles for each batch. the top row represents cell type assignment. single cells were assigned to the cell type correlating most with their expression profile as described in the methods section. cells with zscored correlations below 0.2 were not assigned to any cluster. cells that correlate strongly with more than one bulk expression profile likely represent doublets and were excluded from future analyses. c heatmap of gene expression values, clustered by their pearson’s correlation across rows (genes) and columns (cells). the color bars indicate the cell type and the corresponding batch. only the top 10% genes selected by nbdrop are shown']. Reference sentences:[one of the cell lines was present in two separate batches and indicated that technical batch effects were minor as compared to the biological variability (fig 1).correlation of the single-cell to bulk expression profiles was used for cell type assignment as described in the “methods” section (fig 1a b).cells that did not pass quality control (qc) or could not be unambiguously assigned to a cell line (614 cells ~ 5%) were discarded leaving 11678 cells of known cell type (fig 1c and additional file 1: figure s1 table s1).in contrast on subset 1 where cell type proportions were no longer equal k-means-based methods and mclust failed to identify the different cell types correctly and resulted in average ari of 0.85 (sc3) 0.78 (pcareduce) and 0.69 (mclust) (fig 1g).on subset 2 all methods failed to correctly identify rarer (6 cells 0.16% of total cells) cell types (fig 1h).cell types were then annotated based on pearson’s correlation of the expression profile (log2(normalized counts+ 1)) of the selected features with bulk rna-seq data obtained for each individual cell line (fig 1a b).]
Summary: Correlation of gene expression profiles between single cells and bulk data for cell type assignment, with exclusion of doublets.

Text 377
10.1016/j.cell.2019.06.024
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 2. expression signatures of intra-tumoral heterogeneity among malignant cells (a) top: cell-to-cell correlation matrix of malignant cells from mgh105, with cells ordered by hierarchical clustering. shown on the bottom is the assignment of cells to potential overlapping clusters. (b) hierarchical clustering of signatures for 269 potential clusters defined from 27 tumors. groups of potential clusters are highlighted at the top and were used to define meta-modules. (c) meta-modules composed of genes consistently upregulated in potential clusters of the same group. selected genes are indicated (see table s2 for a full list). (d) relative expression of meta-modules across neurodevelopment-related cell types as measured by scrna-seq (darmanis et al., 2017; darmanis et al., 2015; tirosh et al., 2016b). error bars correspond to standard error.']. Reference sentences:[next we conservatively retained many clusters for further anal- ysis including partially overlapping ones (figure 2a bottom) and defined for each an expression signature consisting of pref- erentially expressed genes.we clustered the signatures resulting in four main groups of which two further segregated robustly into two sub-groups (figure 2b; star methods).the top scoring genes and functional enrichments of the meta-modules (figure 2c and s2e; tables s2 and s3) highlight b c a figure 1.(1) first by the relative expression scores of non-malignant cell types for each of the meta-modules (figure 2).related to figure 2 (a) top: cell-to-cell correlation matrix of malignant cells from mgh136 ordered by hierarchical clustering.signatures were ordered by the hierarchical clustering pattern shown in figure 2b into the four meta-modules which are separated by dashed lines.(h and i) meta-modules identified when restricting the analysis shown in figure 2b to signatures from pediatric tumors.(i) jaccard similarities of the six meta-modules from the main analysis (y axis; as shown in figure 2b) with the five pediatric-only meta-modules (x axis) which were derived from the groups of signatures defined in (h) and numbered by their position from left to right.]
Summary: Correlation patterns among malignant cells, leading to the identification of meta-modules with consistent gene upregulation, compared across different cell types.

Text 378
10.1016/j.cell.2019.06.024
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure s1. related to figure 1 (a) h&e stain of a representative subset of glioblastomas in our cohort. images show features of high-grade glioma with important pleomorphism and cytonuclear atypia. arrowheads highlight vascular proliferation, stars highlight areas of necrosis, both hallmark features of glioblastoma. (b) distribution of the number of genes detected in each of the sequenced cells. (c) classification of cells (dots) to malignant and non-malignant based on cna signal (x axis) and cna correlation (y axis), based on thresholds indicated by red dashed lines. cna signal reﬂect the extent of cnas while cna correlations reﬂect the similarity between the cna pattern of a single cell and that of other malignant cells from the same tumor (see method details). cells mapping to non-malignant cell types are shown in black while the rest are shown in blue. (d) top: hierarchical clustering of all malignant cells by their expression profiles. bottom: assignment of cells to tumors. adult and pediatric tumors are highlighted in blue and red, respectively.']. Reference sentences:[]
Summary: Correlation patterns of malignant cells based on cna signal and cna correlation, with hierarchical clustering and tumor assignment.

Text 379
10.1038/s41586-019-1434-6
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 6 | subgroup-specific transcriptional programs correlate with distinct neuronal lineages. a, pairwise correlation of expression scores of metaprograms defined separately in each subgroup and applied across cells from all subgroups. b, expression scores for neuronal differentiation metaprograms across all cells (n = 7,745). c, relative expression levels of genes specific to neuron-like cells in different subgroups (n = 126). cells are ordered as in b. d, average expression levels of 30 ubcassociated genes (rows) in identified mouse cerebellar cell types (columns). genes are ordered by their relative expression in ubcs. e, relative expression of homologous genes in d in all cells from the mb single-cell cohort (columns). cells are ordered as in b.']. Reference sentences:[pairwise correlation and unsupervised nmf analysis revealed three transcriptional programs (shh-a -b and -c) shared among these tumours (fig 3a extended data fig 6a b supplementary table 2a b).these respective programs were partially recapitulated in shh subgroup pdx models (extended data fig 6c d).pairwise correlation of expression scores confirmed high similarity among cell cycle programs (wnt-a shh-a group 3/4-a; average r = 0.99) (fig 6a).by contrast the neuronal-like differentiation programs (wnt-c shh-c and group 3/4-c) were highly correlated (average r = 0.77; fig 6a b extended data fig 9d) consistent with shared capacity for neuronal differenti- ation across subgroups.half of these genes (52%) were shared between at least two subgroups and included general markers of neuronal differen- tiation (for example eno2 syt11 tubb3 and map2) while the remainder were exclusive to individual subgroups (13–20%; fig 6c extended data fig 9e supplementary table 3).glutamatergic line- age-specific transcription factors eomes and lmx1a ranked among the most-differentially expressed genes specific to the group 3/4-c program (fig 6c supplementary table 3).discriminatory ubc markers were specifically expressed in group 4 single cells and bulk tumour profiles implicating a possible developmental link between ubcs and group 4 mb (fig 6d e extended data fig 9f).© the author(s) under exclusive licence to springer nature limited 2019 a b c e group 3/4-c shh-c wnt-c wnt wnt (n = 34) shh (n = 53) group 3/4 (n = 39) shh group 3 group 4 group 3/4-c wnt-c shh-c shh-a wnt-a group 3/4-a wnt-b group 3/4-b wnt-d shh-b neuron-like specifc genes neuron-like metaprograms ubc-specifc genes unc5d map1b sema6a neurod4 syt4 lmx1a eomes correlation coeffcient –1 1 –6 6 relative expression –6 6 relative expression –3 3 expression score d ubc progenitor top 30 ubc genes gaba pro 1 gaba pro 2 gaba int pc early pc late url early url late ubc/gn pro gn pro gn ubc/gn int glucn early glucn mid glucn late astrocyte midbrain eomes otx2 nnat lmx1a unc5d eomes otx2 nnat lmx1a unc5d 7745 cells average expression (z-score) –2 3.5 fig 6 | subgroup-specific transcriptional programs correlate with distinct neuronal lineages.the pairwise correlation of expression scores is shown in fig 6a.genes that were specific to two or three subgroups were grouped as shared genes (fig 6c extended data fig 9e).article research extended data fig 6 | see next page for caption.article research extended data fig 6 | characterization of shh mb single-cell programs.cells are ordered as in fig 6b (n = 7745).cells are ordered as in d. f heat map shows the relative expression of ubc-specific genes in fig 6d (n = 30; rows) in the bulk expression array cohort (n = 392; columns).]
Patterns of correlation between subgroup-specific transcriptional programs and distinct neuronal lineages in single cells.

Text 380
10.1038/s41586-019-1434-6
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 4 | malignant transcriptional programs within group 3/4. a, pairwise correlations between the expression profiles of all group 3/4 mb cells (n = 4,873). nm, non-malignant. dna methylation-based subgroup prediction scores are indicated (top). b, relative expression of 60 genes representing group 3/4 mb metaprograms from sj617, muv34 and bch1031. cells positive for the cell cycle program (group 3/4-a) are indicated. c, d, scatter plots of the group 3/4-b and group 3/4-c metaprogram expression scores for all group 3 (c) and group 4 (d) mb cells.']. Reference sentences:[to relate mb single-cell profiles to normal developmental hier- archies we leveraged recently generated scrna-seq data for mouse cerebellar development spanning 13 embryonic and early postnatal time points21 (total of 78156 single cells; fig 1a c extended data fig 4a–e supplementary table 1c).shh mb was highly correlated with gnp pop- ulations (cosine distance = 0.54) consistent with literature910 sup- porting gnps as the cell-of-origin for this subgroup (fig 1d extended data fig 4f).pairwise correlation analysis of single cells largely discrim- inated between subgroups with a subset of ‘intermediate’ tumours exhibiting transcriptional ambiguity (muv34 bch825 and sj625; fig 4a).group 3/4-b was primarily characterized by ribosomal and translational initiation/elongation genes (eif3e and eef1a1; p < 0.001; fig 4b) as well as by myc and myc target genes (for example hlx).group 3/4-c contained well-recognized neuronal lineage markers (stmn2 sox4 zic1 and syt11; p < 0.01; fig 4b).we interpret that these programs reflect cell cycle activity (group 3/ 4-a) undifferentiated progenitor-like programs with high myc activity (group 3/4-b) and differentiated neuronal-like programs (group 3/4-c; fig 4b).scoring each group 3/4 mb cell for these programs revealed dis- tinct patterns: prototypic group 3 tumours were dominated (>88% of cells) by the undifferentiated progenitor-like program (group 3/4-b) whereas the differentiated neuronal-like program (group 3/4-c) was observed in almost all cells (>95%) from prototypic group 4 tumours consistent with their neuronal differentiation phenotype1128 (fig 4c d supplementary table 2d).as our earlier cca analysis identified both ubcs and glucn as being highly correlated with group 4 mb expression data- sets (fig 1d extended data fig 4f) we performed a deeper analysis into these correlations.we then merged clusters if the mantel spearman correlation between gene distance matrices (using manhattan distance) was greater than 0.9 (fig 1c extended data fig 4c).cosine distance is then used to calculate correlations between differential expression vectors between studies as a metric for similarity (fig 1d 3d e extended data fig 4f 7j 10a f).both programs were projected onto a centred dataset of interest scaled to a range of zero and one then differentiated programs were subtracted from undifferentiated programs to calculate differentiation scores42 (shown in extended data fig 4b).article research extended data fig 4 | single-cell mapping of mouse cerebellar development.cells are ordered as in fig 4a (n = 4873).]
Patterns related to correlation between different gene expression profiles in group 3/4 medulloblastoma cells.

Text 381
10.1038/s41586-019-1434-6
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 1 | integrated analysis of mb and cerebellar single-cell transcriptomes. a, summary of human mb and developing mouse cerebellar scrna-seq datasets. e10, embryonic day 10; p10, postnatal day 10. b, clinical and molecular details of the mb single-cell cohort. asterisks indicate recurrent mb samples (n = 2/25). samples subjected to wholegenome (g) or whole-exome (e) sequencing are indicated. c, t-distributed stochastic neighbour embedding (t-sne) representation of the cerebellar scrna-seq dataset. colours represent assigned cerebellar cell types. d, radar plot showing the cca coefficients between each mouse cerebellar cell type (n = 18) and bulk human mb expression data3. asterisks indicate significant correlations (fdr corrected permutation test, p < 0.05). malig., malignant; glu, glutamatergic; gaba, gabaergic; seq., sequencing.']. Reference sentences:[mb and cerebellar transcriptomes we prospectively obtained fresh surgical resections from 25 patients with mb (23 diagnostic samples and 2 recurrences) and 11 patient-derived xenograft (pdx) models (fig 1a b extended data fig 1a b supplementary table 1a).each tumour sample was clas- sified on a molecular level using dna methylation arrays17 (fig 1b extended data fig 1b).the majority of tumours were also character- ized by whole-genome (n = 5) or whole-exome (n = 12) sequencing (fig 1b supplementary table 1b).analysis of known subgroup- specific signature genes19 demonstrated expected expression patterns (extended data fig 1b c).pairwise correlation of aggregated scr- na-seq and dna methylation array data further substantiated sub- group classifications and pdx model fidelity (extended data fig 1d).conversely cells derived from group 3 and group 4 tumours exhibited some degree of transcriptional over- lap (extended data fig 1e).to relate mb single-cell profiles to normal developmental hier- archies we leveraged recently generated scrna-seq data for mouse cerebellar development spanning 13 embryonic and early postnatal time points21 (total of 78156 single cells; fig 1a c extended data fig 4a–e supplementary table 1c).shh mb was highly correlated with gnp pop- ulations (cosine distance = 0.54) consistent with literature910 sup- porting gnps as the cell-of-origin for this subgroup (fig 1d extended data fig 4f).the fifth case (bch807) exhibited chromosome 19 gain and was negative for nuclear β-catenin by immunohistochemistry (data not shown) both of which are atypical characteristics for this subgroup despite high-confidence molecular classification as wnt mb (fig 1b).our dataset included three patients with shh mb ranging in age from 3 to 13 years (fig 1b).as our earlier cca analysis identified both ubcs and glucn as being highly correlated with group 4 mb expression data- sets (fig 1d extended data fig 4f) we performed a deeper analysis into these correlations.similar results were observed for glucn although the highest correlations were limited to a subset of group 4 tumours (extended data fig 10a–f).of note we identified a subset of intermediate tumours characterized by varying proportions of both undifferentiated and more differentiated populations (extended data fig 10g).we then merged clusters if the mantel spearman correlation between gene distance matrices (using manhattan distance) was greater than 0.9 (fig 1c extended data fig 4c).cosine distance is then used to calculate correlations between differential expression vectors between studies as a metric for similarity (fig 1d 3d e extended data fig 4f 7j 10a f).article research extended data fig 1 | see next page for caption.article research extended data fig 1 | characteristics of the mb single-cell cohort.article research extended data fig 10 | see next page for caption.article research extended data fig 10 | cross-species mapping of group 4 mb origins.]
Patterns related to correlation between mouse cerebellar cell types and bulk human mb expression data were shown.

Text 382
10.1038/s41586-019-1434-6
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 3 | age-associated developmental hierarchies in shh mb. a, pairwise correlations between the expression profiles of all shh mb cells (n = 1,135). nm, non-malignant. b, relative expression of 60 genes representing shh mb metaprograms across cells from muv41 and sj577. cells positive for the cell cycle program (shh-a) are indicated. c, scatter plot of the normalized shh-b and shh-c metaprogram expression scores for all shh mb cells. d, cca coefficients between shh mb single-cells and mouse glutamatergic cell types. cells are ordered as in b. e, patient age (top), expression levels of atoh1 and neurod1 (middle), and cca coefficients between tumours and mouse glutamatergic cell types (bottom) for bulk shh mbs3 (n = 100). f, expression of neurod1 (left) and atoh1 (right) in the mouse cerebellum. in situ hybridization data were obtained from the allen developing mouse brain atlas (© 2008 allen institute for brain science. allen developing mouse brain atlas http:// developingmouse.brain-map.org). p4, postnatal day 4.']. Reference sentences:[a minority of single cells in our cohort clus- tered with reference immune cells (n = 6) or oligodendrocytes (n = 22) (extended data fig 3a b).we further validated these assignments by quantifying genetic mutations identified by bulk tumour dna sequencing in our scr- na-seq data (1937 mutant and 1952 wild-type transcripts detected; see methods extended data fig 3c–f).pairwise correlation and unsupervised nmf analysis revealed three transcriptional programs (shh-a -b and -c) shared among these tumours (fig 3a extended data fig 6a b supplementary table 2a b).shh-b was enriched for ribosomal genes and translational initiation and elongation factors (eif3e and eef1a1; p < 0.001) and markers of canonical shh sig- nalling (ptch1 and boc; p < 0.001; fig 3b).shh-c was defined by markers of neuronal differentiation (stmn2 map1b tubb2b and sema6a; p < 0.001; fig 3b).scoring each shh mb cell for these programs defined a putative developmental trajectory with proliferating cells restricted to undifferentiated progen- itors (fig 3c).shh-b correlated with undifferentiated ubc–gnp and gnp populations whereas shh-c correlated with ubc–gn intermediate and differentiated granule neuron populations (fig 3d extended data fig 7a–d).to validate these observations in a larger cohort we implemented a focused analysis of ubc gnp and gran- ule neuron populations assessing correlations between these cell types and bulk shh mb expression profiles (fig 3e extended data fig 7e).this analysis broadly split shh mbs into two age-associated categories: infant tumours correlated with intermediate and mature granule neurons (marked by high expression of neurod1) whereas adult tumours correlated with gnps and mixed ubc and gn pro- genitors (marked by high expression of atoh1; fig 3e f extended data fig 7f–j).to detect mutant transcripts in our full-length scrna-seq expression data (shown in fig 2c and extended data fig 3c–f) sequencing reads were first aligned to the human genome build hg19 using star v.2.5.1b.for illustration of the cellular hierarchies in shh mb scores were nor- malized by minimizing the average minimum difference of all cells per sample to −1 or 1 (shown in fig 3c).article research extended data fig 3 | see next page for caption.article research extended data fig 3 | unsupervised clustering and detection of expressed snvs in mb single-cells.cells are ordered as in fig 3a (n = 1135).]
Patterns of correlation between different metaprograms in single cells, reflecting developmental trajectories in the tumor.

Text 383
10.1038/s41586-019-1434-6
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 7e). this analysis broadly split shh mbs into two age-associated categories: infant tumours correlated with intermediate and mature granule neurons (marked by high expression of neurod1), whereas adult tumours correlated with gnps and mixed ubc and gn progenitors (marked by high expression of atoh1; fig 3e, f, extended data fig 7f–j). together, our data suggest that infant and adult shh mbs are enriched for temporally distinct gnp (or ubc) populations and/or have distinct differentiation capacities, further supporting their divergent biology25–27.']. Reference sentences:[]
Summary: Correlation patterns between different cell populations in single-cell transcriptomics data, indicating distinct differentiation capacities and biology.

Text 384
10.1126/science.aav9314
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 5. motif enrichment analysis for gene modules and identification of candidate regulators. (a) selected enriched motifs (columns) found in open chromatin of putative 5′ cis-regulatory regions of coexpressed gene sets (metagenes) for listed cell states (rows). (b to d) metagene scores visualized on the t-sne representation (left in each panel), a significantly enriched motif found in putative 5′ cis-regulatory regions (bottom), and candidate regulators likely to bind the identified motif with correlated expression (right). (b) metagene expressed during nematogenesis and putative pax regulator. (c) metagene expressed in gland cells and putative rfx regulator. (d) metagene expressed in ectodermal epithelial cells of the foot and putative homeobox regulator.']. Reference sentences:[these metagenes had distinct sets of enriched motifs suggesting differences in the transcrip- tion factor classes underlying various cell states (fig 5a and fig s35).additionally homeodomain (otx and arx) and bzip motifs are enriched throughout both epithelial lineages and forkhead motifs appeared to be associated with genes expressed in endo- dermal epithelial cells (fig 5a).a pax transcrip- tion factor binding motif was significantly enriched in the potential regulatory regions near those genes and the pax-a transcription factor (t9974) is part of the metagene (fig 5 a and b and fig s35).similarly we found evidence that an rx homeobox tran- scription factor (t22218) functions in basal disk development and an rfx transcription factor (t30134) functions in gland cell specification; the latter was also reported for nematostella (fig 5 c and d) (20).urd (24) was used to build differentiation trajectories for the intersti- tial and male germline lineages and to analyze the spatial expression of genes in the ectodermal siebert et al. science 365 eaav9314 (2019) 26 july 2019 6 of 8 pax-a (t9974) metagene wg32 metagene wg69 rx (t22218) metagene wg76 rfx4 (t30134) pax zic forkhead pas pou ebf rfx tbox tcf ets bzip otx like arx like nematogenesis oogenesis spermatogenesis mucous gland zymogen gland neuronal ectoderm endoderm pax motif (ma0014.2) fold enrichment: 5.3 q-value: 10-4 rfx motif (ma0798.1) fold enrichment: 6.5 q-value: 10-4 homeobox motif (ma0201.1) fold enrichment: 1.4 q-value: 0.01 a b c d late early fig 5.]
Patterns of correlated gene expression and enriched motifs in different cell states, suggesting distinct transcription factor classes underlying single-cell transcriptomics data.

Text 385
10.1038/s41591-019-0512-5
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 6 | reduced tcf21 expression is associated with increased coronary disease risk. a, linkage disequilibrium relationships (r2 measures) of all genome-wide significant cad-associated snps at the 6q23.2 locus (bottom), relative to the position of tcf21 and long noncoding rnas (linc01312 and tarid) within the locus (top). the r2 color indicates the degree of linkage disequilibrium between each pair of snps, and ranges from 0 (gray) to 1 (red). the corresponding r2 values are also shown in each box. b, relationship between the number of genome-wide significant cad risk alleles in each haplotype (xaxis) and tcf21 expression (yaxis) in 52 primary hcasmc lines. rmp, reads per million mapped reads. c, correlation between the magnitude of cad risk imparted by each risk allele (xaxis) and the relative tcf21 expression from that allele (yaxis) in 36 cad-associated snps at the 6q23.2 locus in aortic tissue from the starnet database. the pvalue was calculated using pearson’s moment correlation coefficient. gray shaded areas indicating 95% confidence intervals are based on fisher’s z-transform.']. Reference sentences:[figure 6a illustrates these snps and their linkage disequilibrium relationships.in a group of 52 hcasmc lines we found that without exception the cad risk allele of each snp was associated with decreased tcf21 expression (extended data fig 6).we also observed the same finding for these snps in highly cad-relevant tissues in the genotype-tissue expression (gtex) database (extended data fig 6).in our hcasmc lines these risk alleles showed an additive effect; haplotypes accu- mulating greater numbers of risk alleles were associated with progressively lower tcf21 expression (p = 0.114; r = −0.41; fig 6b).we first examined all snps in the 6q23.2 locus that were associated with cad at genome-wide significance (p < 5 × 10-8; fig 6a).]
Summary: Correlation between CAD risk alleles and decreased TCF21 expression in different cell types.

Text 386
10.1186/s13073-019-0657-3
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 2 multicellular disease models (mcdms) from a mouse model of aia. mcdms were constructed based on scrna-seq data by connecting differentially expressed genes in each cell type with predicted upstream regulators in all other cell types. cell type size corresponds to centrality score. numbers indicated by the nodes denote the number of identified cells of specific type (for example in ra joint, we have identified 4258 granulocytes). a an mcdm of lymph nodes from arthritic mice. b an mcdm from arthritic joints. c multicellular model of a healthy mouse joint (lymph node model is not shown because there was only one predicted interaction). gene names of predicted upstream regulators are indicated on arrows. treg, t regulatory cells. d correlation between centrality score of cell types and enrichment of genes harboring genetic variants identified by gwas and expert curated repositories among differentially expressed genes (the genes were derived from disgenet and the analysis based on the mouse orthologues of the human genes)']. Reference sentences:[this led to the identification of a potential interaction between these two cell types (fig 2a–c; additional file 2).in the lymph node only two cell types t and b lympho- cytes had predicted interactions (fig 2a).by contrast in the joints all cell types were connected with each other in a multi-directional manner mainly by cytokines and chemo- kines (fig 2b).visual inspection of the resulting mcdm networks revealed no obvious key regulatory cell type such as a “hub” that had many more interactions than the others nor an upstream cell type that regulated the others in a linear chain (fig 2a b).the relevance of centrality as an indication of the pathogenic importance of the mcdm cell types was supported by a significant correlation between centrality and the degree of enrichment of genes associated with ra by genetic variants among differentially expressed genes in each cell type (pearson r = 0.85 p = 0.03) (fig 2d).]
Patterns of correlation between centrality scores of cell types and enrichment of genes harboring genetic variants associated with disease.

Text 387
10.1038/s41592-019-0492-x
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 3 | comparison of computed maps for genes of unknown expression patterns with their actual expression detected by in situ hybridization. a, hierarchical clustering of srgs by expression correlation identifies clusters of genes with related expression patterns containing both genes of known and unknown function. b–d, expression patterns of genes detected by in situ hybridization largely confirm the expression patterns predicted by the computed maps. for testing, all genes in the ‘red’ (b), ‘orange’ (c) and ‘light-blue’ clusters (d) shown in a were selected. images representative of ten discs and two biological replicates. scale bars, 100µm.']. Reference sentences:[in comparison a similarly sized set of 829 ‘highly variable genes’ (hvgs) obtained using the seurat package17 contained 17 benchmark genes (fig 1d and supplementary fig 3).to identify benchmark genes (supplementary table 3) with a false- negative rate below 10% the srg algorithm generates a list of 824 genes and nbdrop generates a list of 1000 genes (supplementary fig 3a).we verified the resulting ‘computed expression maps’ by comparing them to fish (fig 3 and 4).to cluster genes by expression pattern we calculated a cross-correlation matrix of gene expression for all 824 srgs from our dropseq data set against each other and then hierarchically clustered them (fig 3a and supplementary data 1).the ‘red’ cluster (fig 3b) con- tains genes expressed in the wing pouch with a pattern along the anterior–posterior axis.fish for genes in the orange and light-blue clusters analogously con- firmed the main characteristics of the computed maps (fig 3cd).]
Summary: Correlation-based clustering of gene expression patterns validated by in situ hybridization in single-cell data.

Text 388
10.1038/s41592-019-0492-x
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 2 | generation of gene expression maps based on gene expression correlations. a, number of cells that are positive for expression of en or ci, which have largely mutually exclusive expression patterns in the wing disc, at different sequencing depth thresholds. b, top hits from genome-wide correlation analysis of gene expression across all sequenced wing disc cells. n=948 cells. correlation was calculated using pearson’s correlation coefficient (correl. coeff.) with one outlier removed. see methods for details. c, two-dimensional histograms showing the distribution of all sequenced cells according to the level of expression of the two indicated genes. d, concept for generating expression maps based on gene expression correlations. a positive correlation between two genes indicates they have overlapping expression domains, whereas a negative correlation indicates expression domains that are more mutually exclusive. e, schematic representation of the method used to generate computed expression maps.']. Reference sentences:[with 10x genomics we sequenced 2554 cells with median depth of 10620 transcripts and 1998 genes per cell (supplementary fig 2a).for instance although ~35% of wing disc cells should express engrailed and the other ~65% should express ci in our dropseq library only 14% of cells were en+ (>0 reads) and 28% were ci+ (left edge of graph fig 2a).setting a minimum numi per cell threshold did not solve this: above a threshold of 12000 umis per cell 84% of cells were en+ or ci+ with only 45 of the 948 sequenced cells passing this threshold (fig 2a).using our 10x genomics data set which has more sequencing depth (supplementary table 1) we reached 90% confidence on the cell location in the en+ or ci+ domain with a 45000 umi per cell threshold which leaves only 140 cells in the data set (supplementary fig 2b).likewise the top genes correlating or anti-cor- relating to wg or dpp are expressed in overlapping or complemen- tary expression patterns respectively (fig 2b).the underlying data can be visualized using two-dimensional histograms (fig 2c): few cells express both wg and frizzled 2 (fz2) which are expressed in complementary domains.in contrast multiple cells have detectable transcripts for both wg and wnt6 (fig 2c) which are expressed in overlapping domains.this analysis also identifies novel genes that correlate with en suggesting a similar expression pattern (cr44334 fig 2b).this method uses the correlation coefficient between two genes to determine whether their expression domains are overlap- ping (positive correlation) complementary (negative correlation) or orthogonal (no correlation) (fig 2d).for a given cell within the known expression domain of gene 1 (red dot fig 2d) uncharac- terized gene 2 is likely also expressed in this cell if the two genes correlate and not expressed if they anti-correlate.we overlayed aligned and thresholded these patterns yielding binary expression domains (fig 2e and supplementary table 4).to compute an expres- sion map of a gene for each position in the wing we added the cor- relation coefficients between this gene and the mapping genes with a +1 or −1 weighting factor depending on whether the mapping gene is expressed in that position or not (fig 2e).the quality and resolution of the expression maps depend on parameters that can be further refined: (1) the alignment of the ‘mapping gene’ domains to each other (left side fig 2e) is nontriv- ial.]
Patterns of gene expression correlations in single cells, indicating overlapping or mutually exclusive expression domains.

Text 389
10.1016/j.celrep.2019.06.092
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 5. pseudo-temporal ordering and grn analysis uncover critical transcriptional regulators potentially governing cell state transitions during the development of vsmcs (a) loss of myocardial marker expression and gain of vsmc marker expression during myocardial-to-vsmc trans-differentiation. black circle, vsmc marker; black triangle, myocardial marker. (b) expression of genes in the notch signaling is positively correlated with the trajectory of myocardial-to-vsmc trans-differentiation. (c) critical transcriptional regulators potentially involved in myocardial-to-vsmc trans-differentiation. see also tables s4 and s5. (d) loss of mesenchymal marker expression and gain of vsmc marker expression during c8 mesenchymal-to-vsmc transition. black circle, vsmc marker; black star, mesenchymal marker. (e) expression of genes in the notch signaling is positively correlated with the trajectory of c8 mesenchymal-to-vsmc transition. (f) critical transcriptional regulators potentially involved in c8 mesenchymal-to-vsmc transition. see also table s4 and figure s5.']. Reference sentences:[for myocardial-to-vsmc trans-differentiation (c9-c4-c3) we identified genes significantly correlated with the trajectory (table s4) and observed the loss of myocardial marker expression and gain of vsmc marker expression during the pro- gression of trans-differentiation (figure 5a).strikingly the expression of genes in the notch signaling pathway including receptor (notch1) ligand (jag1) and downstream targets (hey1 hey2 heyl and pdgfrb) was positively correlated with the trajectory (figure 5b).furthermore by gene regulatory network (grn) analysis we obtained a set of key regulators acti- vated sequentially along the trajectory and potentially drove the process (figure 5c).for mesenchymal (the c8 penk+ subpopulation)-to-vsmc transition (c8-c4-c3) we identified genes that were significantly correlated with the trajectory (table s4) and observed the loss of mesenchymal marker expression and gain of vsmc marker expression during the progression of the transition (figure 5d).the expression of genes in the notch signaling pathway was positively correlated with the trajectory (figure 5e).interestingly we found heyl and tbx20 also ranked at the top of the key reg- ulators (figure 5f).this observation is in line with our figure 5.]
Patterns of gene expression correlated with cell state transitions, including upregulation of vsmc markers and notch signaling genes. Regulatory networks suggest key regulators driving transitions.

Text 390
10.1186/s13195-019-0524-x
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 1 correlation between bulk rna-seq and single-nuclei rna-seq aligned using the pre-mrna and mrna annotation references. along the xaxis, we show the gene expression values obtained from the bulk rna-seq, and along the y-axis, the single-nuclei expression, which was analyzed as bulk rna-seq. a bulk rna-seq vs snuclrna-seq aligned with mrna (see the “methods” section). b bulk rna-seq vs snuclrna-seq aligned with pre-mrna']. Reference sentences:[we observed a pearson correlation of r2 = 91% between snuclrna-seq with mrna reference and bulk rna-seq (fig 1a).on the other hand the pearson correlation of snuclrna-seq with pre-mrna reference against bulk rna-seq was r2 = 86% (fig 1b).]
Summary: Correlation between bulk RNA-seq and single-nuclei RNA-seq using mRNA and pre-mRNA references showed high Pearson correlation coefficients (r2 = 91% and r2 = 86%, respectively).

Text 391
10.1073/pnas.1908180116
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 5. deviated commitment route with enhanced nonepithelial cell fates in eec-ipsc differentiation. (a) differentiation gene expression trajectories of control nipsc1 and eec-ipscs during differentiation and that of primary kcs using pseudotime (monocle) analysis. differentiation days are indicated by colors. (b) differentiation gene expression trajectories of control nipsc1 (pink) and eec-ipscs, r204w-ipscs (blue), and r304-ipscs (green) during differentiation using pseudotime (monocle) analysis, without primary kcs. differentiation days are indicated by shapes. (c) heatmap of 6 clusters of de genes detected by pseudotime analysis based on their z-scores (indicated by the color). (d) go analysis showing biological process terms enriched for de genes in each cluster. the gene ratio is indicated by the dot size and the significance by the color of the dot (red, low p value; blue, high p value). (e) correlation of the single-cell transcriptome against bulk rna-seq data of nheks and hsmms. correlation coefficient is indicated by color.']. Reference sentences:[pscs did not reach the primary kc state (fig 5a).although both eec-ipsc lines had a small number of cells moving in the pseudotime path toward primary kcs r304w-ipscs showed more subbranches and more cells at subbranches than that of r204w-ipscs suggesting more severe differentiation defects (fig 5a).when primary kc profiles were excluded in the analysis the bifurcation that oc- curred on day 7 and day 15 between control pscs and eec- ipscs became more apparent (fig 5b).the pseudotime path of differentiated r304w-ipscs and the majority of r204w- ipscs took an alternative direction (branch 2 in fig 5b) other than the path of control pscs.according to the pseudotime ordering differentially regulated genes were clustered into 6 clusters and cluster 1 and 2 genes corresponded to the bi- furcation branches 1 and 2 respectively (fig 5c).go analyses of cluster 1 genes showed that these genes were associated with epidermal development and keratinocyte differentiation whereas that of cluster 2 genes showed an enrichment of genes involved in immune response (fig 5d and dataset s7).in agreement correlation analyses to bulk rna-seq data showed that genes enriched for branch 1 cells had a higher correlation to gene signatures of epithelial nhek and hmec cells and genes enriched for branch 2 cells correlated better to hsmm and other nonepithelial cells (fig 5e and si appendix fig s6c).genes in other clusters were expressed earlier during differentiation (fig 5 b and c).although the majority of cells deviated from the route toward epidermal cells showing the importance of p63 controlling the epidermal commitment a small percentage of r204w and r304w ipscs were still on the path toward the epi- dermal fate even though their cell states were distinct from the mature epidermal fate (fig 5a).however rather than simply being blocked between the ectodermal and fully committed epidermal stage suggested by p63- deficient mouse studies (14) our single-cell transcriptome and pseudotime analyses showed that the majority of differentiated eec pscs deviated from the normal route of epidermal commitment to a more mesodermal cell identity (fig 5).]
Summary: Correlation of single-cell transcriptome with bulk RNA-seq data reveals distinct gene expression patterns related to epithelial and nonepithelial cell fates during differentiation.

Text 392
10.1038/s41586-019-1506-7
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 6 | divergent cell-type expression between human and mouse. a, comparison of expression levels of 14,553 orthologous genes between human and mouse for sst chodl and opcs. genes outside the blue lines have highly divergent expression (>tenfold change) and include clusterspecific markers (orange dots). pearson correlation (r). b, patterns of expression change between human and mouse for 9,748 divergent genes (67% of orthologous genes). groups of genes with similar patterns are labelled by the affected cell class. top, number of genes with expression divergence restricted to each broad class of cell types. c, distribution of scores (methods) measuring the magnitude of expression change across homologous cell types for all genes (dark blue) and housekeeping genes (light blue). d, gene families (n > 10 genes) with the most divergent expression patterns (highest score) include neurotransmitter receptors, ion channels and cell-adhesion molecules. e, expression (trimmed average cpm) of most serotonin receptors differs between homologous cell types. scores listed on far right. f, g, in situ hybridization of divergent genes shows shifts in laminar expression consistent with different cell-type expression in human and mouse. red bars show layers with enriched expression. scale bars, human, 250 µm; mouse, 100 µm.']. Reference sentences:[excitatory types often span layers excitatory neuron types broadly segregated by layer expressed known laminar markers and were generally most similar to types in the same or adjacent layers (fig 2 extended data fig 6)—perhaps reflecting a developmental imprint of the inside-out generation of cortical layers16.complex relationships between clusters are represented as constellation diagrams that capture both continuous and discrete variation in gene expression among types as described22 (extended data fig 6a).three types were enriched in l2–l3 ten rorb-expressing types were enriched in l3–l6 and four themis-expressing and seven fezf2-expressing types in l5–l6 (fig 2a extended data fig 6a).distribution across layers was not a result of dissection error; gene expression was consistent within each cluster across nuclei that were dissected from different layers (extended data fig 6b–e) and in situ distributions largely matched multilayer snrna-seq predictions (fig 2a c extended data fig 7).for each pair of homologous types we compared expression of 14553 ort- hologous genes between human and mouse (fig 6).non-neuronal types had the most divergent expression (3643 genes with more than tenfold difference) supporting increased evolutionary divergence of non- neuronal expression patterns between human and mouse17 (fig 6a b).twenty-three per cent of genes (3382) were more highly divergent than 95% of 252 housekeeping genes (fig 6c) recently shown to be stably expressed in multiple cell types in mouse and human49.serotonin receptors exhibit highly divergent expression between spe- cies: four of seven g-protein-coupled receptors and both ionotropic receptor subunits (htr3a and htr3b) were in the top 10% most- divergent genes (fig 6e).among the top 3% most-divergent genes (supplementary table 5) the collagens col24a1 and col12a1 and glutamate receptor subunits grik1 and grin3a were expressed in different cell types between species and were validated to have different laminar distributions in human and mouse (fig 6f g).ish experiments shown in fig 6 were repeated 4 (col24a1) 3 (col12a1 grik1) and 6 (grin3a) times for human and 2 (col24a1 col12a1 grin3a) and 6 (grik1) times for mouse.article research extended data fig 6 | excitatory neuron types express marker genes across multiple cortical layers.]
Patterns of gene expression divergence between human and mouse cells, particularly in neurotransmitter receptors and ion channels, with significant differences in serotonin receptor expression.

Text 393
10.1038/s41467-019-11746-0
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 8 b1-box oligomerization is essential for pml-rarα and apl. a survival data of pml-rarα (pr) or pml-rarαf158e (pr f158e) transgenic mice. the apl phenotypes of these transgenic mice are shown in supplementary fig 8c–e. b, c single-cell rna sequencing analysis of b1-oligomerization in pmlrarα. the tsne projections were calculated based on the genetic profiling of ~12,500 bone marrow cells from wt, pr, and pr f158e mice. information about the sequencing runs, represented as raw bases and average reads/cell per sample, is included in the supplementary table 1. to avoid batch differences, the seurat alignment method canonical correlation analysis (cca)62 was used for an integrated analysis of three datasets. for cell clustering, the graph-based method implemented in seurat was used. in b, the cells/clusters were grouped into five different cell types, including granulocyte (clusters 0, 4, 5, 9, 12), erythrocyte (clusters 1, 2, 3, 6, 7,10), monocyte (cluster 8), stem cell (cluster 11), b cell (clusters13, 14), and dendritic cell (cluster 15). the tsne plots of the key markers per cell type are shown in supplementary fig 8a. in c, the wt, pr, and pr f158e cells are colored differently to highlight the altered pml-rarα-driven differentiation by b1 mutant. more information concerning the cell type and distribution percentages is shown in supplementary fig 8bc']. Reference sentences:[thirdly using pr or pr f158e transgenic mice we also observed a strict correlation between b1-oligomerization and leukemogenesis (fig 8a and supplementary fig 7c–e).in marked contrast none of pr f158e mice developed leukemia (fig 8a).in order to get insight into the leukemogenic transactivation program triggered by oligomerization the pr pr f158e transgenic mice and the normal fvb/n mice (termed wt) were subjected to single cell rna sequencing analysis (fig 8b c and supplementary table 1).according to the gene-expression profiling the bone marrow cells from wt (3816) pr (4806) and pr f158e (3874) were classified into 15 different clusters that could be recognized as granulocyte erythrocyte monocyte stem cell b cell and dendritic cell (fig 8b).the t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding plots of the key markers used in the classification of different cell types are shown in the supplementary fig 8a.in comparison pr f158e displayed a marked difference in cell differentiation (fig 8c).the cell type distributions for pr f158e were 26% 63% 3.9% 4.5% 0.9% and 1.7% for granulocyte erythrocyte monocyte stem cell b cell and dendritic cell respectively (supplementary fig 8b c).more consistently the b1 single mutation that targets the pr oligomerization again precludes apl development in vivo (fig 8 and 9).more information concerning the cell type and distribution percentages is shown in supplementary fig 8bc f158e +ato +ato +ato l73e 5 μm w157e/f158e pml f158e w157e/f158e l73e ato soluble insoluble pml w157e/f158e l73e f158e a c b –ato –ato –ato – + – + – + – + 95 130 180 95 130 180 (kda) 95 130 180 (kda) anti-actin anti-ha anti-ha anti-actin pml pml-(s)n fig 7 b1-oligomerization might occur after ring tetramerization.]
Summary: Correlation between b1-oligomerization and leukemogenesis observed in single-cell RNA sequencing of different cell types, highlighting altered differentiation in pr f158e mice.

Text 394
10.1016/j.cell.2019.08.008
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure s2. validation of myeloid cells diversity at the protein level, related to figure 2 (a) correlation matrix of gene modules defined by gene-to-gene correlation analysis of single cells within the myeloid clusters. mapping between modules and genes is detailed in table s2, sheet 4. (b-g) validation of the scrnaseq analysis of mnp at the protein level. heat-map showing relative expression values of genes encoding cell membrane markers (columns) enriched in macrophages or dendritic cells clusters (rows) (b). step-by-step gating strategy of lamina propria cells (c). step-by-step gating strategy of macrophages in total lamina propria cells (d). step-by-step gating strategy of dendritic cells within cd14- cells (e). representative dot plots of immature and activated dcs (left) and macrophages (right) in uninﬂamed and inﬂamed ileums (f). heatmap showing the color-coded log-normalized expression of membrane markers between myeloid cell populations analyzed by cytof (n = 7 cd patients) (g).']. Reference sentences:[]
Summary: Correlation patterns between gene modules in myeloid cells were analyzed, validating protein expression diversity in macrophages and dendritic cells.

Text 395
10.1038/s41467-019-11721-9
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 5 functional characterisation of the signature of pre-adapted (pa) cells. a hallmark gene sets38 enriched in genes either up- or downregulated in preadapted (pa) cells. b correlation analysis between expression of cell-cycle marker genes and genes belonging to the pa signature (upregulation) at the single-cell level. rs = spearman’s rank correlation coefficient. c same representation as in fig 3d, but limited to community 1. two sub-communities were identified (left) with community 1.1 being more strongly enriched for genes in the pa signature (p-value from hypergeometric test)']. Reference sentences:[we then excluded the pa cells identified using swne (fig 4a) and trained another random forest classifier that was tested on the pa cells (sup- plementary fig 5a).first of all we identified the claudin-1 gene (cldn1) as a suitable surface marker to enrich for pa cells by facs in combination with cd44 (supplementary data 3 and supplementary fig 5b).pa cells displayed features of mixed epithelial and mesenchymal traits along with upregulation of p53 pathway cell polarity (apical junction components) and hypoxia (fig 5a upper panel).pa cells also showed reduced erα activity and downregulation of the cell cycle machinery while still expressing esr1 (fig 5a lower panel and supplementary fig 5c).indeed when we further dissected the grn (community #1) into its two main components we found extensive overlap between one of these components and the pa signature (fig 5c; p-value = 2.7e-21; hypergeometric test).]
Patterns of correlation between cell-cycle marker genes and genes in the pre-adapted signature in single cells.

Text 396
10.1126/science.aax1971
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 1. umap projection shows tissues and developmental trajectories in c. elegans embryogenesis. (a) umap projection of the 81,286 cells from our sc-rna-seq dataset that passed our initial qc. this umap does not include 4,738 additional cells that were initially filtered, but were later whitelisted and included in downstream analyses. color indicates the age of the embryo that a cell came from, estimated from correlation to a whole-embryo rna-seq time series (21) and measured in minutes after an embryo’s first cell cleavage. (b) positions of cells from four samples of synchronized embryos on the umap plot. (c) histogram of estimated embryo time for all cells in the dataset. (d) bar plot showing for bins of embryo time, the percentage of cells in that embryo time bin that we were able to assign to a terminal cell type or pre-terminal lineage. (e) scatter plot showing correlation of the number of cells of a given anatomical cell class in a single embryo (x axis, log scale) with the number of cells recovered in our data (y axis, log scale). each point corresponds to a cell class. only cells with estimated embryo time >= 390 min are included in the counts (many earlier cells are still dividing). red line is a linear fit, excluding points with y = 0.']. Reference sentences:[we found that trajectories (24) in the umap projection reflect a smooth progression of embryo time (fig 1a) with cells collected from later time points usually occupying more peripheral positions (fig 1b).approximately 75% of the cells recovered (64384 cells) were from embryos spanning 210-510 min post first cleavage cor- responding to mid-gastrulation (~190 cell stage) to terminal differentiation (3-fold stage of development) (fig 1c); how- ever cells were also recovered from earlier embryos (<210 min 9886 cells) and later embryos (>510 min 11754 cells).the global umap arranges cells into a central group of progenitor cells and branches corresponding to eight major tissues (fig 1a and fig s3): muscle/mesoderm epidermis pharynx ciliated neurons non-ciliated neurons glia/excretory cells intestine and germline.we successfully annotated 93% of cells in our dataset with a cell type (for terminal cells) or a cell lineage (for progenitor cells discussed below) (fig 1d).the number of cells anno- tated for each cell type was variable but roughly fit the expec- tation on the basis of the number of cells of that type present in a single embryo (fig 1e r = 0.64 p = 2.4e-13 t test).(b) umap plot colored by embryo time (colors matched to fig 1a) and gene expression (red indicates >0 reads for the listed gene).]
Patterns of correlation between cell types and embryo time in single-cell transcriptomics data.

Text 397
10.1126/science.aax1971
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 5. correlation between cell lineage and the transcriptome in the ectoderm. (a) jensen-shannon (js) distance between the transcriptomes of pairs of ectodermal cells (ab lineage), faceted by cell generation and lineage distance. ab5 refers to the cell generation produced by 5 divisions of the ab founder cell, and likewise for generations ab6-9. the “transcriptome” of a given anatomical cell is defined as the average gene expression profile of all sc-rna-seq cells annotated as that anatomical cell. pairs of bilaterally symmetric cells are excluded from the statistics. (b) estimates of the extent to which lineage predicts the transcriptome in ab5-9. (c) distribution of the number of “lineage signature transcription factors”—tfs that distinguish a cell from its sister—for all cells in ab5-9. the outlier points in ab8 are instances where a terminal epidermal cell is a sister of a neuroblast. (d) proportion of lineage signature transcription factors for a cell in a given generation that have expression maintained in 0, 1, or 2 of the cell’s daughters in the subsequent generation. (e) proportion of lineage signature tfs for which expression in a given cell was maintained from the cell’s parent vs. newly activated after the parent’s division.']. Reference sentences:[in ab5 (early/mid-gastrulation; 50-cell stage) the earliest stage where our lineage annotations were near-complete sis- ter cells were more similar than distant relatives but the dif- ference was not large (fig 5a).consistent with the above analysis we find that the extent to which lineage pre- dicts the transcriptome increases throughout gastrulation peaks at 55% in ab7 and then falls to 18% after terminal dif- ferentiation in ab9 (fig 5b).the median number of these “lineage signature tfs” per cell in- creased over time ranging from 1.5 in ab5 to 14 in ab9 (fig 5c).a substantial number of lineage signature tfs (~40-50%) had expression selectively maintained in only one of a cell’s two daughters (fig 5d).the proportion of lineage signature tfs that are newly expressed ranged from 33-61% and in- creased over time in ab6-9 (fig 5e).see methods (section titled “pseudo-r2 statistic used in fig 5b and fig s29b”).]
Patterns of lineage-related gene expression changes across cell generations in the ectoderm.

Text 398
10.1002/1873-3468.13623
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 4. scrna-seq depicted bmmcs. (a) cell distribution in pca. pc1 explained 22.6% of all differences between cells, and pc2 explained 5.6%. (b) unsupervised clustering of 22 single cd38+cd138+ bmmcs and six cd38àcd138à control cells with pca. a total of 400 deg of first 4 principal dimensions were plotted (100 degs for each principal dimension). (c–g) myelomaassociated genes pointed in pc1 direction. correlations between each gene and pc1/ pc2 were calculated (f, g) and are plotted (c–e).']. Reference sentences:[mm-related gene groups were chosen and their loading value or score in pc1 and pc2 was plotted (fig 4c–e) and summarized (fig 4fg).in pca pc1 (principal component 1) represented 22.6% of the total variance and provided separation between the two types of cells (fig 4a).the hierar- chical clustering of the highly variable genes among cells showed that the two types of cells have distinct gene expression patterns and tend to cluster separately as expected (fig 4b table s1).as expected all genes strongly correlated with pc1 (loading value > 0.5) (fig 4c–e).furthermore tumorigenic genes correlated with pc1 [34–39] (fig 4fg).universal tran- scription of fgfrs (fibroblast growth factor receptor 3) hdgf (hepatoma-derived growth factor) igf1 (in- sulin-like growth factors 1) and tnfrsf17 (b-cell fig 4. scrna-seq depicted bmmcs.pca result for fig 4b.]
Patterns of gene expression correlations with principal components, separating cell types based on myeloma-associated genes.

Text 399
10.1016/j.ccell.2019.08.007
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 3. intratumoral heterogeneity in liver cancer (a) trajectory of malignant cells of each tumor constructed using a reversed graph embedding method. cells were colored by the average expression of ten stemness-related genes (i.e., epcam, krt19, prom1, aldh1a1, cd24, anpep, cd44, icam1, cd47, and sox9). (b) pairwise correlation of all the malignant cells from eight tumors. each pixel in the heatmap represents the correlation of two cells (the corresponding row and column). red, positive correlation; blue, negative correlation.']. Reference sentences:[intratumor transcriptomic biodiversity among tumors could be further revealed by correlation analysis of all malignant cells (figure 3b).we used pcs instead of original gene expression profiles of the malignant cells to measure diversity (i.e. ith) of each tumor to capture major information and reduce noise (figure 3c).we then divided eight tumor samples based on their diversity scores into diversity-high (div-high) and diversity-low (div-low) groups (figure 3e).a combined analysis revealed that some icca tumors had a significantly higher diversity score than hcc tumors (figure 3h).we found that five icca patients had div-high tumors with a poor prognosis and two hcc patients had div-low tumors with a good prognosis while the remaining eight patients (four hcc and four icca) had similar intermediate diversity scores and an intermediate prognosis (figure 3i).there was a significant trend for transcriptomic diversity and its association with patient outcome among div-high div-median and div-low groups (figure 3i).]
Patterns of correlation between malignant cells in liver cancer tumors, revealing intratumor transcriptomic biodiversity.

Text 400
10.1016/j.immuni.2019.09.013
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 6. stip identifies transcriptional circuits downstream of tcf-1 (a) pseudotime trajectory across naive p14 cells and p14 cells from d8 of cl13 and cl13dcd4 infections. pca space was created with the esgs from figure 1. the line represents the longest lineage trajectory predicted by tscan (ji and ji, 2016). (b) expression of tcf7 and other indicated tfs is plotted over pseudotime. (c) a heatmap displaying tf expression across the pseudotime trajectory. (d) a tcf7-centered network was generated (see star methods). border color for each gene represents the mrna-expression relationship with tcf7 (e.g., positively [orange] or negatively [blue] correlated with tcf7 or neither [purple]). fill color indicates the presence of tcf7 binding motif(s) in the open chromatin of the indicated tfs in naive only (cyan), naive and cl13 (dark blue), or cl13 only (red).']. Reference sentences:[thus applying stip to the data above showed tcf7 expression to undergo a monotone increase allowing anchoring on this gene for analysis (figure 6a).several tf genes including tox id3 eomes myb and nr4a1 were positively correlated with tcf7 (figure 6b).we then examined an extended list of tfs (figure 6c).in addition to these two major clusters several tf genes including smad7 gata3 runx2 and zeb2 occupied an intermediate location in the pseudotime trajectory around the point of greatest change for tcf7 and id2 perhaps reﬂecting a metastable state or addi- tional (perhaps transient) population heterogeneity (figure 6c).to further interrogate how tcf-1 might regulate the tfs iden- tified by stips in tex cells we constructed a transcriptional network (figure 6d).we identified tfs predicted to be regulated by tcf-1 in tn cells only (e.g. ikzf1 and gata3) in tn cells and early tex precursor cell populations (e.g. myb hif1a eomes id3 and prdm1) or only in early tex precursor cell populations (e.g. id2 tox zeb2 smad7 batf and nfatc1) (figure 6d).notably tcf-1 was predicted to repress genes that are involved in teff cell differentiation (including id2 prdm1 and runx1) and to promote expression of genes that have been implicated in fostering exhaustion (such as eomes batf and nfatc1) (figure 6d).]
Patterns of TF expression correlated with TCF7 over pseudotime trajectory, revealing potential regulatory networks in single cells.

Text 401
10.1038/s41586-019-1652-y
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 6c). the macrophage transcriptome profile was highly tissue-specific and exhibited connectivity to other macrophage subtypes within the tissue of residence, obscuring potential ontogenic relationships (fig 5a, b, extended data fig 6c–e). monocytes, macrophages, pdcs, dc1s and dc2s were present in both skin and kidney (extended data fig 1a). nlt monocytes and dcs correlated strongly with fetal liver counterparts but macrophages were more tissue-specific, with vcam1 expression in liver and f13a1 expression in skin, as observed in adult tissue macrophages38,39 (extended data fig 6e). tissue-specific gene-expression patterns that confer functional specialization were detected for dcs; for example, s100a4 (encoding a molecule involved in t cell activation) was expressed in skin dc1s40 and aoah (encoding an enzyme involved in lipopolysaccharide response modulation) was expressed in liver dc2s41 (extended data fig 6e). dc activation in spite of the sterile fetal environment suggests an active role for fetal dcs in mediating tolerance, as previously reported42.']. Reference sentences:[]
Summary: Correlation between cell types in different tissues based on tissue-specific gene expression patterns.

Text 402
10.1038/s41586-019-1654-9
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 1 | reconstructing human cerebral organoid differentiation from pluripotency. a, scrna-seq was performed on ipsc- and embryonic stem cell (esc)-derived cells (43,498) at different time points during cerebral organoid differentiation from pluripotency. eb, embryoid body; n. ect., neuroectoderm; n. epi., neuroepithelium. b, all time points were combined, pseudocells (11,427) were constructed and the differentiation trajectory was reconstructed using spring17. pseudocells are coloured by time point (main image) or cell line (top left). org., organoid; rgc, radial glial cell. c, rna velocity analysis20 supports differentiation of npcs into distinct regions of the developing human brain. d, left, spring plot coloured (magenta) by reference similarity spectrum (rss) to bulk rna-seq data generated from diverse brain regions at different time points (allen brain atlas)18. shown are the tissues and time points with maximum correlation. cb, cerebellum. right, spring plot coloured (cyan) by marker gene expression. pcw, postconception weeks. e, spring reconstruction based on the rss of organoid']. Reference sentences:[we con- structed a force-directed k-nearest neighbour graph17 based on pseu- docells to visualize the temporal progression (fig 1b).these observations were based on inspection of marker genes comparisons to transcriptomes from regions and cells from the developing human brain1819 and analysis of spliced and unspliced transcripts20 (fig 1c d extended data fig 2).we identified cells on the neuronal lineage (49153 cells) classified distinct cell types from different brain regions analysed differenti- ation trajectories and ordered ventral and dorsal telencephalic cells along pseudotimes (fig 1e–g extended data fig 3).nevertheless gene-expression patterns of each trajectory across the lines were highly correlated and cells rep- resenting each region clustered together (fig 1h i extended data fig 3).nuclei clustered into different populations of neurons astrocytes oligodendrocytes microglia and endothelial cells (fig 4a b extended data fig 10).in the box plots of fig 1g 2d boxes represent iqr and whiskers represent minimum and maximum with outliers removed.letter research extended data fig 10 | supplementary analysis of human chimpanzee and macaque adult brain snrna-seq.]
Summary: Correlation patterns in gene expression trajectories of different cell types during human cerebral organoid differentiation.

Text 403
10.1016/j.cell.2019.09.020
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure s7. comparison of smart-seq versus 10x clusters using canonical correlation analysis (cca), related to figure 6 (a and b) t-sne plots of all vmh cells (n = 45,005) combining smart-seq (dark red; n = 3,824) and 10x (dark blue; n = 41,181) before (a) and after (b) cca alignment. (c) joint cca clusters are labeled on t-sne plots following alignment. (d and e) dot plots comparing cluster membership in joint cca clusters (x axis) with either smart-seq (d) or 10x (e) clusters (y axis). (f) bar graph showing distribution of cells from smart-seq (non-retro-seq cells only; n = 2,756) and 10x datasets across joint cca clusters. (g) ‘‘river plots’’ illustrating how smart-seq (left) and 10x (right) clusters are mapped onto joint cca clusters (middle). (h) bar graphs showing relative proportions of cells in each cca cluster expressing marker genes for the four major vmh classes identified here.']. Reference sentences:[]
Summary: Comparison of smart-seq and 10x clusters using canonical correlation analysis reveals correlation patterns in cell clusters and marker gene expressions.

Text 404
10.1016/j.cell.2019.09.020
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 7. relationship between behavioral activation, projection specificity, and transcriptomic identity in the cca framework (a) bar graphs, dot plots, and heatmap illustrating act-seq (top; figure 5b), retro-seq (middle; figures 3c and 3d), and seqfish (bottom; figure 2d) data projected onto vmhvl cca clusters, respectively. act-seq: bars with colored and gray outlines indicate significant (p < 0.05 after multiple-comparison corrections across behaviors and clusters; three-way anova and bonferroni post hoc test), and non-significant (p > 0.05) differences in ieg expression versus control, respectively. filled and open bars indicate significant and non-significant differences in ieg expression versus other clusters within a given behavior or behavioral category, respectively. all m-m and all m-f indicate combined data from all male-male or male-female social behaviors, respectively, for both fos and fosl2 expression. lower bar graphs illustrate data for individual behaviors (fos only). retro-seq: dot size indicates the percent of retrogradely labeled vmh cells from dpag, lpag, or mpoa (middle); dot colors indicate relative ratio (retrogradely labeled divided by total sequenced populations) of clusters. shaded gray dots indicate clusters with ratio <1). seqfish: ‘‘diff (a-p)’’ indicates percent difference in cell number between anterior versus posterior vmhvl (color scale) for cells in corresponding seqfish clusters. (b and c) scatterplots showing correlation between preferential fos activation during all m-m versus all m-f behaviors (x axis) and projection preference between dpag versus mpoa (y axis) for major act-seq clusters (b) and correlation between preferential fos activation during social fear (using group-housed mice) versus control (x axis) and proportion of cells projecting to lpag (y axis) for vmhvl cca clusters (c).']. Reference sentences:[cell 179 713–728 october 17 2019 721 figure 7.similarly another social fear-activated t-type dlk1_4cca18 also preferentially projected to lpag (figure 7a).a positive correla- tion was observed between cca t-types that were preferentially activated during all m-m versus all m-f social interactions (e.g. esr1_7cca9; figure 7a all m-m) and that exhibited a relative bias for projections to dpag versus mpoa based on retro-seq data (figure 7b; r = 0.71).by contrast cluster esr1_5cca7 which ex- hibited significantly greater fosl2 inductions following m-f versus m-m social interactions (figure 7a) did not show any pro- jection bias.the results of these experiments indicated that vmhvlesr1 cells activated during aggression showed a significant bias for pro- jection to dpag versus mpoa whereas vmhvlesr1 cells acti- vated following m-f interactions showed no such bias (figure 7d).the following statistical analyses were conduct- ed: anovas followed by bonferroni post hoc tests to compare 1) the expression of fos induced by each behavioral paradigm with control across clusters (figures 5b and 7a) and 2) the proportion of double+ (fos & rhsv) cells between aggression and control in- jected in dpag and mpoa (figure 7d); fisher’s exact tests to see 1) which retrogradely labeled smart-seq classes/clusters from a given projection were significantly different from the proportions of retrogradely labeled cells from other projection (figures 3b and 3c) 2) what kinds of joint cca clusters were significantly different from the expected proportions of cells in a given sex (figure 6b) and 3) how differently cells from sex-specific clusters were located between anterior versus posterior vmhvl (figure 6e); a likelihood ratio test (mcdavid et al. 2013) was used to calculate adjusted p-values (findmarkers function in seurat; after bonferroni correction using all genes in the dataset) for determining the significance values of differential ieg expression compared to controls (figure s5b).unpaired t tests were used to compute p-values for 1) the differential expressions of genes in seqfish (figure 6f) and 2) different proportion of double+ (fos & rhsv) cells between m-f social interaction tests (mating + m-f ci tests) and control both in dpag and mpoa injections (figure 7d).]
Correlation between activation patterns and projection preferences in single cells.

Text 405
10.1177/0022034519882355
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 5. single-cell rna sequencing reveals the degree of cellular heterogeneity in the parotid gland. (a) t-sne visualization of the various cellular populations in the young mouse pg. (b) dendrogram of clusters based on log-transformed mean expression values of the 9 epithelial clusters (left panel). the tree was computed per spearman’s rank correlation with ward linkage. the right panel depicts a t-sne plot based on hierarchical clustering analysis performed in the left panel. (c) violin plots demonstrate expression of known acinar (aqp5, amy1), basal (krt14), ductal (krt7), and myoepithelial (acta2) genes. (d) heat map depicts the top differentially expressed genes in each cluster as compared with all other clusters. upper bars represent the cluster assignments. c, cluster; pg, parotid gland; smg, submandibular gland; t-sne, t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedded.']. Reference sentences:[]
Summary: Correlation patterns between gene expressions in different cell clusters in the parotid gland are visualized using t-SNE and hierarchical clustering.

Text 406
10.1177/0022034519882355
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 3. hierarchical clustering of parotid salivary gland and mouse tissues. transcripts per million values from the top 2,500 genes with the highest mean absolute deviation were used to cluster the parotid gland and adult mouse tissues. the resulting correlation plot demonstrates that the parotid glands cluster very closely with the submandibular gland. red dots indicate positive correlation, while blue dots denote negative correlation. size of the dots emphasizes increasing degree of absolute correlation.']. Reference sentences:[]
Summary: Correlation patterns between parotid gland and mouse tissues based on gene expression levels.

Text 407
10.1016/j.cell.2019.09.035
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 2. t-bet and rorgt expression delineates distinct cdc2 subsets (a) heatmap reporting scaled, imputed expression for the top 10 differentially expressed genes for each cdc2 cluster identified in figure 1e. genes of interest are shown on the right. (b) expression of rorc transcript in bulk sorted t-bet– cdc2s, t-bet+ cdc2s, and cdc1s. (c) expression of clec12a, esam, and clec10a in cdc2s from tbx21rfp-cre mice. far right: clec12a and clec10a expression within t-bet– cdc2s. (d) summary graph for (c). each symbol represents one mouse. (e) enrichment of go pathways in in t-bet+ versus t-bet– cdc2 clusters. (f) correlation between splenic and mln cdc2 transcriptomes. error bars represent mean ± sem. see also figures s2 and s7 and tables s1, s2, and s3.']. Reference sentences:[characterizing cdc2 heterogeneity to gain further insight into cdc2 heterogeneity we identified differential gene expression signatures for the individual cdc2 clusters (figure 2a; table s1).the two t-bet– cdc2 clusters (3 and 10) shared expression of csf1r and lyz2 and other genes known to be associated with monocytes and macrophages (figure 2a).tmem176a and tmem176b were highly expressed in t-bet– cdc2s (figure 2a).although we failed to detect expression of rorc by scrna-seq (data not shown) it was highly enriched in t-bet– cdc2s in the bulk rna-seq dataset (figure 2b).furthermore gene set enrichment analysis (gsea) analysis revealed enrich- ment of pathways involved in lipid localization transport and metabolism in t-bet– cdc2s (figure 2e).transcriptional profiles of t-bet+ and t-bet– cdc2s as well as cdc1s isolated from spleen or mesenteric ln (mln) using bulk rna-seq revealed near perfect correlation of differentially expressed dc subset-specific genes across tissues (figure 2f).2399 peaks (associated with 1498 genes) were a b c d e f figure 2.related to figure 2 (a).]
Summary: Correlation patterns between different cdc2 subsets and gene expression signatures in single-cell transcriptomics data.

Text 408
10.1016/j.cell.2019.09.035
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure s3. transcriptional and epigenetic landscape of cdcs, related to figure 4 (a). principal component analysis (pca) for atac-seq of cdc1s, t-bet+ cdc2s and t-bet– cdc2s. each symbol represents a biological replicate for each cell-type. (b). predictive value of tf motifs in peaks more accessible in cdc2s versus cdc1s. (c). correlation between differential atac-seq peak accessibility and gene expression in cdc1s versus cdc2s.']. Reference sentences:[]
Summary: Correlation between peak accessibility and gene expression in different cell types.

Text 409
10.1038/s41467-019-12894-z
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 3 correlating host cell and viral gene expression reveals candidates modulating infection. a relationship between differentially expressed genes and viral transcription. the horizontal axis shows the maximal log(2)-transformed bulk rna-seq fold change of the three time points after infection compared to uninfected cells, the vertical axis, and the linear regression coefficient of the gene expression with the sum of viral transcripts in bins of 20 cells, using only high hsv-1 cells as defined in supplementary fig 2a. color represents the slope of the linear regression. source data for this panel is provided in supplementary data 3. b, c distribution of normalized expression of rasd1 (b) and rrad (c) on the tsne projection introduced in fig 1. cells without detectable expression are colored in light gray. d, e rnai of hsv-1 transcription-dependent factors rasd1 and rrad. viral dna in the cell culture supernatant was measured using plaques assays (d) or qpcr (e) (quantified using serial dilutions of a virus stock with known activity, a value of 1 corresponding to 106 pfu/ml). bar plots indicate means, error bars denote standard deviations, and the individual measurement values (two each from n = 2 biologically independent samples) are shown as gray dots. f rt-qpcr of rnai samples. rasd1 and rrad mrna levels were normalized using gapdh mrna values and to control cells. the individual measurement values are shown as gray dots. source data for the bar plots are provided in the source data file']. Reference sentences:[to study changes in viral gene expression upon infection we first examined differential gene expression by bulk mrna-seq (supplementary fig 3a).to identify genes differentially expres- sed only in infected cells we plotted the correlation of host gene expression to viral transcripts in single cells against the maximal fold change in the population mrna-seq data (fig 3a supple- mentary data 3).among host genes activated only in infected cells we identified hemoglobin α genes hba1 and hba2 (fig 3a) which were previously shown to be induced by the viral transcription factor icp47.additionally two genes encoding ras-related small gtpases rasd1 (fig 3b) and rrad (fig 3c) showed strong positive correlations with viral transcripts.to investigate the inﬂuence of rasd1 and rrad on viral production we depleted rasd1 and rrad by small interfering rna (sirna) knockdown prior to infection (fig 3c–e) and observed increased virion production at 16 hpi suggesting that both genes posses some antiviral activity.rna velocity values and the number of nascent reads for two genes induced by the infection rasd1 and hoxa9 (fig 3) are shown in fig 4c j and supplementary fig 4d–g.we have observed that both possesses antiviral properties (fig 3).to demonstrate that the distributional properties of single-cell data did not bias the correlation statistic we have repeated the correlation analysis in fig 3b (y-axis) with variance stabilized data using sctransform74.correlations of host cell gene expression with hsv-1 gene expression (fig 3) sulf1 or nqo1 expression (fig 4) were calculated using binned cells to reduce noise.data underlying fig 3a–c 6a–c supplementary fig 6a–e i are provided in the source data file and for fig 3a in supplementary data 3.]
Patterns of correlation between host and viral gene expression in single cells, identifying potential modulators of infection.

Text 410
10.1073/pnas.1907883116
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 5. the differentiation state of t cells for 7 supercentenarians (sc1–sc7) and 5 controls (ct1–ct5). (a) pseudotime trajectory of t cells estimated using monocle 2. a continuous value from 0 to 12 was assigned to each cell as a pseudotime. the bottom shows the general scheme of t cell differentiation. tn, naïve; tcm, central memory; tem, effector memory; and temra, effector memory reexpressing cd45ra. (b) expression transition of differentiationassociated genes along the pseudotime. (c) percentages of t cells along the pseudotime for supercentenarians (sc) and controls (ct). (d) percentages of cd4 and ct8 ctls among the total t cells along the pseudotime. (e) correlation of gene expression between cd4 and cd8 ctls. (f) expression transition of selected genes shown separately for cd4 and cd8 ctls.']. Reference sentences:[to understand the cd4+gzmb+ t cells in the context of differentiation we constructed single-cell tra- jectories using the monocle 2 (version 2.4.0) r package (35); all t cells in tc1 and tc2 were placed on these trajectories based on changes in their transcriptomes (fig 5a and si appendix fig s6a).we observed rapid reduction of ccr7 expression followed by the gradual loss of costimulatory molecules cd27 and cd28 (fig 5b) indicating that early pseudotime corresponds to naïve and central memory t cells.the results also showed a gradual increase of expression of gzma gzmb and prf1 which en- code cytotoxic molecules as well as concordant patterns of ex- pression of transcripts encoding adhesion and migration molecules (fig 5b and si appendix fig s6c) indicating progressive dif- ferentiation states of effector memory t cells corresponding to late pseudotime.the t cells of the supercentenarians were clearly shifted toward more differentiated states compared with those of the controls (fig 5c): nearly 60% of t cells in the controls were placed in the earliest pseudotime corresponding to naïve and central memory t cells whereas t cells of supercentenarians were enriched in late pseudotime.cd4 ctls were distributed in the latter half of pseudotime in a similar way to cd8 ctls (fig 5d and si appendix fig s6f) indicating a similar differentiation process despite fundamental functional differences between the 2 cell types.indeed mean expression values were highly correlated between cd4 and cd8 ctls with the exception of a small number of genes (fig 5e).the expression of 4 major cytotoxic genes gzma gzmb prf1 and nkg7 which are known to be abundant in cd4 ctls (32 36) increased along the latter half of pseudotime in a similar manner between cd4 and cd8 ctls; however the expression of 2 other major cytotoxic genes gzmh and gnly showed slightly different patterns for cd4 and cd8 ctls (fig 5f and si appendix fig s6g).to explore the mechanism by which cd4 ctls increased in supercentenarians we performed an a b c d e f fig 5.]
Summary: Correlation of gene expression between CD4 and CD8 T cells during differentiation, with similar patterns in cytotoxic gene expression.

Text 411
10.1073/pnas.1907883116
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 4. expansion of cytotoxic cd4 t cells in supercentenarians. (a) classification of cytotoxic t cells into 3 subtypes—cd4 ctls, cd8 ctls, and γδ t cells—was based on the expression of cd4, cd8, and trdc (see also si appendix, fig s4a) in t cells of 7 supercentenarians (sc1–sc7) and 5 controls (ct1–ct5); cell positions are from the tsne plot in fig 3b. (b) percentages of cd4 ctls and γδ t cells among the total t cells. p < 0.05 (wilcoxon rank sum test); ns, not significant. (c) percentages of cd4+ t cells and cd8+ t cells in total t cells. ns, not significant (wilcoxon rank sum test). (d) facs profiles of 6 supercentenarians (sc1, sc5–7, and sc9) and 1 semisupercentenarian (sc8). cells gated on cd3+ were profiled using cd4 (x axis) and gzmb or igg1 κ as an isotype control (y axis). cells in top right corners are cd4 ctls. (e) percentages of cd4+ gzmb+ cells among the total t cells of the 6 supercentenarians and 1 semisupercentenarian listed in d and 5 controls (ct4, ct5, and ct6–ct8). p < 0.05 (wilcoxon rank sum test). (f) correlation between percentages of cd4 ctls determined by rna-seq and facs measurements. each dot represents 1 donor, shown in green for supercentenarians (sc1, sc5–sc7) and red for controls (ct4, ct5).']. Reference sentences:[however cd8a and cd8b which encode the 2 components of cd8 were expressed only in a subset of cytotoxic t cells whereas cd4 and trdc (t cell receptor delta constant) were expressed in the other subsets suggesting the presence of 3 subsets of cytotoxic t cells: cd8 cytotoxic t lymphocytes (ctls) cd4 ctls and γδ t cells (fig 4a).to investigate cytotoxic t cells other than cd8 ctls we manually defined cd4 ctls and γδ t cells based on ranges of cd4 cd8 and trdc expression (fig 4 a bottom right and si appendix fig s4a).pnas latest articles | 3 of 10 immunology and inflammation downloaded at univ of western ontario on november 15 2019 t cells was moderate in size and comparable to that in the controls (p = 0.2) (fig 4b and si appendix fig s4b).according to the cd4/cd8 staining profile (gated on cd3+) the t cells in the supercentenarians were not pre- dominantly cd8+ t cells (fig 4c and si appendix fig s4c).remarkably cd4+gzmb+ t cells were quite abundant in the supercentenarians in which at least 10% (mean 30.1%) of t cells are cd4 ctls in all tested supercentenarian samples (n = 7) (fig 4d).the percentages of cd4 ctls (cd4+gzmb+ t cells) in the total t cell populations were significantly higher in the centenarians than in the controls (p = 0.018 wilcoxon rank sum test) (fig 4e and si appendix fig s4d).the percentages of cd4 ctls correlated well between single-cell rna-seq and facs analyses according to the comparison of the 6 commonly analyzed samples (4 supercentenarians and 2 controls) (fig 4f).consistent with the clustering analyses tc1 (the non- cytotoxic cluster) was mostly distributed throughout the early 0 10 20 30 40 50 70 80 90 100 110 0 10 20 30 40 50 10 20 30 40 50 0 20 40 60 80 70 80 90 100 110 0 20 40 60 80 70 80 90 100 110 sc1 sc5 sc6 sc8 sc9 sc10 isotype control of gzmb (igg1 =) sc7 a d e f b c cd4 tcr= cd40lg cd8a cd8b cd4 gzmb scs cts % in t cells % in t cells scs cts rna-seq (% in t cells) age cd4+ gzmb+ cd4+ cd8- cd4- cd8+ age age facs (% in t cells) scs cts == cd4 ctl ct5 ct4 ct3 ct2 ct1 sc7 sc6 sc5 sc4 sc3 sc2 sc1 0 25 50 ct5 ct4 ct3 ct2 ct1 sc7 sc6 sc5 sc4 sc3 sc2 sc1 0 25 50 cd4 ctl == % in t cells % in t cells ns ns ns fig 4.next we examined the distributions of cd4 ctls (n = 5274) and cd8 ctls (n = 7643) which were defined in fig 4a and si appendix fig s4a.cd4 ctls accounted for about 62% (sc1) and 48% (sc2) of the cd4 t cells in this analysis which is consistent with the first sample collection from the same donor (fig 4b).the reported fractions of cd4 ctls are generally as low as a few percent of the total cd4 t cells in healthy pbmcs (32 40) whereas the size of the cd4 ctl fraction in the supercentenarians analyzed was on average 25% of t cells as measured by rna-seq and supported by the independent facs measurements (fig 4 b and e).more intriguingly 5 out of 7 supercentenarians analyzed by facs had more gzmb+ than gzmb− cd4 t cells (fig 4d).]
Summary: Patterns of correlation between CD4 cytotoxic T cells determined by RNA-seq and FACS measurements in supercentenarians and controls.

Text 412
10.1016/j.cell.2019.10.027
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure s5. decreased abundances of cd39+ iets correlated with increased platelets aggregation in the colonic mucosae of children with colitis or ibd, related to figure 6. (a) gating strategy showing cd4, cd8 and gd t cell subsets in the blood and colon. cd39 was highly expressed by colonic memory cd8+ t cells, cd73 was expressed by naive cd8+ t cells both in the blood and in the colon. (b) gating strategy showing vd1+ and vd2+ gd t cells. cd39 was highly expressed by colonic vd1+ gd t cells. (c) gating strategy for cd4+ t cells. (d) spearman correlation between expressions of entpd1 and other genes in cd8 and gd t-entpd1 subsets. genes are ranked by their increasing correlation coefficient (r), and top 50 genes are labeled. genes with a q-value % 0.05 are shown in red points. (e) significantly upregulated pathways in entpd1+ (2,481 cells) compared to entpd1- (7,739 cells) cd8+ and gd+ t cells. the average t statistic across cells was determined by gsva analysis for two clusters.']. Reference sentences:[]
Summary: Correlation patterns between gene expressions in different T cell subsets in colonic mucosae of children with colitis or IBD.

Text 413
10.1016/j.celrep.2019.10.073
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 4. linking distal myb enhancers to blood-associated traits (a) ern sub-network highlighting hemoglobin genes as common secondary targets of enhancers across the genome. (b) myb-enh-3 exhibits dnase i hypersensitivity in cd34+ common myeloid progenitor cells. snps and associated traits are highlighted. (c) gene set enrichment analysis (gsea) of the degs upon myb-enh-3 knockdown. genes upregulated are positively correlated with hematopoietic differentiation genes. (d) heatmap indicates the expression pattern of genes that are identified in (c). several hematopoietic differentiation genes are indicated. see also figure s4.']. Reference sentences:[genetic variants of a myb enhancer inﬂuence blood cell state through secondary targets to highlight one potential application of erns we focus on enhancers of myb (figure 4a).gwas studies have identified variants in the myb locus that are associated with blood cell differentiation (figure 4b).consistently the ern suggests that myb-enh-3 regulates erythrocytic gene clusters including hemoglobin genes and glycophorins (gypa gypb and gypc) as secondary tar- gets through a myb-dependent mechanism (figure 4a).]
Summary: Correlation between myb enhancers and hematopoietic differentiation genes in single cells is shown through gene expression patterns.

Text 414
10.1016/j.celrep.2019.10.131
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 3. th1-like transcriptomic patterns (a) heatmap defines meta-clusters based on pearson correlation among til, dln, and arm cluster fold change vectors (as defined in the text) (left). tables show tissue origin and cell-type color code per cluster (right). (b and c) comparison of til th1 and isc (clusters t1-2 and t3-4, respectively, as shown in figure 1a), as well as arm th1 (as shown in figures 2 and s2a). (b) contour plots of th1 (orange) and isc (blue) til distribution according to scrna-seq-detected normalized expression of irf7 versus ifit3b (left) and klrc1 versus lag3 (right). (c) heatmap shows row-standardized expression of differentially expressed genes across til group ii isc, til group i th1, and arm th1.']. Reference sentences:[this analysis distributed the 40 reproducible clusters (out of 47 from all exper- iments) into 6 meta-clusters (with manual curation attaching meta-cluster 1b to 1a) of which four meta-clusters (meta-clusters 1 3 5 and 6) contained cells of more than one tissue context (figure 3a; table s1).contrasting with the treg clusters the correlation analysis failed to detect similarities among three other groups charac- terized by heterogeneous tbx21 levels and distributed into meta-clusters 2 (til group ii t3-4) 4 (arm cells) and 6 (til group i t1-2) (figure 3a).accordingly ﬂow cytometry verified expression of cd94 and nkg2a (encoded by klrd1 and klrc1 respectively) in a subset of gp66-specific tils whereas no expression was detected among gp66-specific arm or dln cells (figure 3d top).consis- tent with the scrna-seq analysis ﬂow cytometry detected irf7 protein expression among gp66-specific tils but not arm-responding cd4+ t cells (figure 3d bottom); furthermore ﬂow cytometry distinguished the irf7hi (isc) from nkg2a+ (th1) til subsets (figure 3d).thus because t-bet normally represses genes induced by type i ifn (iwata et al. 2017) we verified co- expression of t-bet and irf7 by intra-cellular staining and ﬂow cytometry (figure 3f).consistent with high expression of the ifng gene by th1 tils nkg2a+ tils produced ifng protein when stimulated unlike nkg2a= tils (figure 3g).meta-cluster 6 unexpectedly associated th1 tils and a dln ccr7+ cluster (the group iv n5 cluster) (figure 3a) suggesting a potential link between tils and dln cells.cell reports 29 3019–3032 december 3 2019 3023 figure 3.meta-cluster 1 consisted of arm tfh clusters and dln group v tfh clusters (figure 3a).]
Summary: Correlation patterns among different cell clusters based on gene expression profiles.

Text 415
10.1016/j.celrep.2019.10.131
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 1. characterization of cd4+ til, dln, and arm transcriptomes by scrna-seq (a–d) tils and dln cells from wild-type (wt) mice at day 14 after mc38-gp injection analyzed by scrna-seq and ﬂow cytometry. (a) heatmap shows row-standardized expression of selected genes across til and dln clusters. bar plot indicates the percentage of cells in each cluster relative to the total til or dln cell number. (b) flow cytometry contour plots of foxp3 versus t-bet in cd44hi gp66+ dln cells (left) and in cd44hicd4+ splenocytes from tumor-free control mice (right). (c) flow cytometry contour plots of foxp3 versus t-bet in pd-1+ and gp66+ tils (left) and in cd44hi cd4+ splenocytes from tumor-free control mice (right). (b and c) data representative from 18 tumor-bearing mice analyzed in four separate experiments. (d) t-sne display of tils and dln cells, shaded gray by tissue origin (left) or color coded by main group (right, as defined in a). (e) t-sne (til and dln cell positioning as shown in b) display of normalized expression levels of selected genes. (f) heatmap shows pearson correlation between cluster fold change vectors (as defined in the text) across the two replicate experiments for tils (left) and dln cells (right). see also figures s1 and s2 and tables s1 and s6.']. Reference sentences:[applying such high-resolution clustering separately to tils and dln cells we identified 15 clusters (til clusters t1–7 and dln clusters n1–8) refining the original five main groups (figure 1a).although performed on the pooled populations t-sne recapitulated the minimal overlap between til and dln transcriptomic patterns (figure 1d left) ir- respective of parameter selection (figure s2c) and even after controlling for potential confounders (figures s2d and s2f– s2h; star methods).cluster groups i–v segregated from each other when projected on the t-sne plot (figure 1d right).overlay of gene expression confirmed co-localization of cells ex- pressing cluster-characteristic genes (figure 1e).to compare these clusters we evaluated the correlation figure 1.we found signif- icant inter-replicate matches for most clusters (figure 1f) supporting the reproducibility of the underlying transcriptomic patterns.(b and c) comparison of til th1 and isc (clusters t1-2 and t3-4 respectively as shown in figure 1a) as well as arm th1 (as shown in figures 2 and s2a).transcriptomic continuum between til and dln tumor-reactive cells (a) violin plots of differentially expressed genes across til group i th1 and dln group iv ccr7+ (clusters t1-2 and n5 respectively as shown in figure 1a) as well as all other til and dln populations.heatmaps show pearson correlation (left) and row- standardized expression of overlapping genes across til th1 treg isc and nres cells (clusters t1-2 t6-7 t3-4 and t5 respectively as shown in figure 1a) (right).]
Correlation patterns between clusters in single-cell transcriptomes of CD4+ TIL and DLN cells.

Text 416
10.1016/j.celrep.2019.10.131
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 6. correspondence to human data and dysfunction gene signatures (a) analysis of human liver cancer tilhlc. heatmap shows row-standardized expression of selected genes across tilhlc clusters. (b) heatmap defines meta-clusters based on pearson correlation between tilhlc and mc38gp til clusters (top). overlap of genes characteristic of human liver til isc cluster with mouse til isc gene signature (bottom). (c) analysis of human melanoma tilmel. boxplots show the percentage of cells expressing selected ifn signaling-characteristic genes in cd4+cd3+ cells across responding and non-responding lesions. unpaired wilcoxon test; p < 0.05, p < 0.01, and p < 0.001. see also figure s6 and table s5.']. Reference sentences:[high- resolution clustering separated the tilhlc cells into 11 clusters which could be combined into groups displaying features of th1 isc (of which 36% are pdcd1+) and treg tils and cells under- going cell cycle (figure 6a).although pooled analysis of cd4+ pd-1+ tils from mc38-gp tumors (til) with tilhlc only identi- fied similarities between cells undergoing cell cycle (figures s6a and s6b) cluster correlation analysis indicated significant similarities between treg cells cell cycle and isc clusters from til versus tilhlc (figure 6b top).cell reports 29 3019–3032 december 3 2019 3027 of overexpression patterns between til isc and their human counterpart including type i ifn-induced genes and irf7 (ikush- ima et al. 2013) (figure 6b bottom; table s5).relative to responsive tumors non- responsive tumors had significantly higher fractions of cells expressing isc signature genes (49 of 108 genes adjusted p < 0.05) including stat1 irf7 and irf9 (figure 6c; table s5).although recent scrna- seq studies had shed light on the treg component of cd4+ tils (ahmadzadeh et al. 2019; azizi et al. 2018; zhang et al. 2018; zheng et al. 2017a) our study assessed the transcriptomes of figure 6.]
Summary: Correlation patterns between human and mouse single cells in liver cancer and melanoma, focusing on gene expression similarities and differences.

Text 417
10.1016/j.cell.2019.11.010
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure s5. microglia transcriptional heterogeneity within species, related to figure 4 (a-e) cell-to-cell correlation plots of microglia and corresponding heatmaps for most differentially expressed genes. in the heatmaps, each mark represents one cell and each row the cells from one individual. (a) marmoset microglia (5 pooled brains). (b) macaque microglia (5 pooled brains). (c) hamster microglia (5 pooled']. Reference sentences:[]
Summary: Cell-to-cell correlation plots of microglia gene expression within species, showing patterns of gene expression similarity across individual cells.

Text 418
10.1016/j.cell.2019.11.010
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 3. conserved microglia core gene expression program across evolution (a) heatmap representation of ranked bulk rna-seq expression of in silico-deconvoluted microglia. genes are clustered by the most differential gene expression (k-means = 17), with a representative dendrogram showing nested groups of microglia genes measured by pearson’s correlation coefficient. shown are annotations of shared and differential profile signatures over species, considering the top 50% (0.50 percentile) of all genes in the gene-set as a fixed expression threshold (by row). non-expressed and lowly expressed genes are in the lowest percentile (0.5–0.67), medium expressed genes in the mean percentile (0.68– 0.85), and highest expressed genes in the top percentile (0.86–1.0). biological replicates; human microglia (n = 6), marmoset microglia (n = 3), macaque microglia (n = 3), hamster microglia (n = 3), sheep microglia (n = 3), chicken (n = 3), zebrafish (n = 3, five pooled brains each), mouse microglia (one individual from each strain is depicted; n = 3 for c57bl/6, cd1, balb/c, and fvb, n = 5 for wild mice).']. Reference sentences:[cell 179 1609–1622 december 12 2019 1613 a macaque3 marmoset3 sheep3 hamster3 chicken3 human1 human2 human3 human4 human5 human6 macaque1 macaque2 marmoset1 marmoset2 sheep1 sheep2 c57bl/6 cd1 balb/c fvb wild mouse hamster1 hamster2 chicken1 chicken2 csf1r spi1 c1qa/c p2ry12 clec5a aif1 slco2b1 mafb tgfbr1 siglech fcrls ccr5 high large mammals humans intermediate 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 mouse low zebrafish3 zebrafish1 zebrafish2 17 spp1 c3 vsig4 ch25h c2 apoc24 core irf8 c 0.5 1.0 p2ry12 0.5 1.0 mertk 0.5 1.0 cd81 0.5 1.0 cst3 0.5 1.0 spi1 0.5 1.0 irf8 grn 0.5 1.0 sall1 0.5 1.0 human macaca marmoset sheep mouse hamster chicken zebrafish b percentile genes n = 8890 no orthologue 1.0 0.75 0.50 percentile 0.0 1.0 apbb1ip d apoe human macaca marmoset sheep mouse hamster chicken zebrafish trem2 hexb 0.5 1.0 tardbp 0.5 1.0 mef2a 0.5 1.0 bin1 0.5 1.0 microglia macrophages c57/bl6 -1 c57/bl6 -2 c57/bl6 -3 cd1-1 cd1-2 cd1-3 balbc-1 balbc-2 balbc-3 fvb-1 fvb-2 fvb-3 wild-1 wild-2 wild-3 wild-4 wild-5 pm-1 pm-2 sim-1 sim-2 lim-1 lim-2 mono-1 mono-2 spm-1 spm-2 km-1 km-2 am-1 am-2 genes n =163 crybb1 sall1 sall3 adgrg1 apbb1ip gpr34 gpr84 gpr155 ldhb mlxipl neurl1a siglech 0.5 1.0 aif1l 1.0 0.75 0.50 percentile human 1 human 2 human 3 human 4 human 5 human 6 marmoset 1 marmoset 2 sheep 1 sheep 2 c57bl/6 cd1 balb/c fvb wild mouse 1 wild mouse 2 hamster 1 hamster 2 chicken 1 chicken 2 zebrafish 1 zebrafish 2 macaque 1 macaque 2 1 8 ctss 1 8 vsir 1641 apoe 1 8 trem2 1 8 cd81 p2ry12 1 4 grn 41 16 csf1r 41 16 c1qb 1 8 laptm5 41 16 log2(umi per cell) tgfbr2 ctsa/ctsb/ctsc/hexa vsir figure 3.another conserved microglial gene is amyloid b precursor protein-binding family b member 1 interacting protein (apbb1ip) (figure 3d) a binding partner of amyloid precursor protein (app) tau 14-3-3g and glycogen synthase kinase 3 b (gsk3 b).overall ~9k genes were used for downstream clustering and analysis (figure 3a).to test for enrichment for genes related to neurodegenerative diseases we used gwas gene lists from the nhgri-ebi gwas catalog (mapped to genome assembly grch38.p12 and dbsnp build 151) and perform hypergeometric distribution test for each cluster from figure 3a.pooling single cell rna-seq data in order to compare single cell rna-seq data to the deconvoluted bulk clustering in figure 3a (figure s4a) we collected single cells from microglia associated metacells and computed the pooled expression for each species.all genes from microglia core gene module (figure 3a) were plotted unless an orthologous gene did not exist in one of the two compared species.analysis of the microglia gene program across evolution related to figure 3 (a) heatmap representation of an average of scrna-seq expression (umis per cell/number of cells) of microglia across species (row).(c) bar plots of ranked bulk rna-seq expression of representative highly conserved and highly expressed genes identified from clusters 1-3 (as shown in figure 3a).significant biological processes or pathways identified using metascape software analysis of all genes from clusters 1-3 using all genes as a background (f) or microglia specific genes identified in a comparative analysis of tissue macrophages and microglia in figure 3d using all genes as a background (g).conservation of p2y12 and pu.1 across microglia evolution related to figure 3 (a) representative p2y12 immunohistochemistry microscopical images from paraffin brain sections from human macaque marmoset mouse sheep boar or bat as well as representative immunoﬂuorescence image from brain section from zebrafish.(d) gene ontology (go) terms enriched in human macaque marmoset and sheep microglia (cluster 11; figure 3a).(i-l) clusters identified from cross-species comparison of microglia (from figure 3a) and visual demonstration of enrichment of gwas terms shown as fold change per cluster for parkinson’s disease (i) alzheimer’s disease (j) schizophrenia (k) and huntington disease (l).]
Patterns related to correlation in gene expression across different species of microglia are shown in the figure.

Text 419
10.1016/j.cell.2019.11.010
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 4. identification of microglia heterogeneity using single-cell rna-seq analysis (a) scatterplot showing the relationship between inter- and intra-cluster correlation (pearson correlation, rs) of species. (b and c) cell-to-cell correlation plot of microglia and corresponding heatmap for the most differentially expressed genes. in the heatmap, each mark represents one metacell, and each row marks a metacell from one individual. (b) human microglia (n = 6). color barcoding marks each human individual at the bottom of the respective row. (c) microglia from wild mice (n = 5). color barcoding marks each mouse strain analyzed. dotted vertical lines represent separation into metacells. (d) top panel: volcano plot showing the most differential genes between homeostatic microglia and microglia subtypes (metacells 3–6, p < 10à7). bottom panel: magnification of specific genes for clarity. (e) stack bar graph showing the contribution (percent) of each human sample to the corresponding expression of the putative senescent-like genes. (f) gene-gene correlation heatmap of the senescent-like cluster in human microglia (metacells 3–6). red shows high correlation; blue shows anti-correlation.']. Reference sentences:[we first clustered microglia cells from each species separately and compared the intra- versus inter-cluster correlation to evaluate whether there is a clear separation of microglia sub-types or a continuum of a single population (figure 4a).surprisingly we observed low inter-cluster correlation in all human samples compared with intra-clusters (figure 4a).these subtypes are unrelated to sex differences and observed in both male and female microglia (table s1; figure 4b).the human microglia het- erogeneity identified was in sharp contrast to mouse (figure 4c) macaque (figure s5a) marmoset (figure s5b) hamster (fig- ure s5c) and sheep (figure s5d) which show high intra-cluster correlation and predominantly one dominant microglia type.probing the heterogeneity of human microglia we observed a sub-population with increased expression of several inﬂamma- tory genes that have been linked with a senescence-associated secretory phenotype (sasp) (von kobbe 2018; figure 4d) without any change of homeostatic gene expression (figure 4d).this microglia subset consistently co-ex- pressed cdkn1 ccl3 ccl4 ccl3l3 and ccl4l2 (figure 4f) along with higher expression of inﬂammatory cytokines such as tnf and il1b (figures 4b and 4d).this signature was not observed in young adult mouse microglia (figure 4c) but inﬂam- matory cytokines have been seen previously in a sub-set of mi- croglia in aged c57bl/6 mice (hammond et al. 2019; sierra et al. 2007; mrdjen et al. 2018).cell 179 1609–1622 december 12 2019 1615 a b c d e f figure 4.the genes related to the non- homeostatic subtypes of human microglia (from figure 4) were removed from the analysis.defining a module gene signature to define a module gene signature for metacells 3-6 of the human microglia (figure 4f) we used the normalized umi table to identify the most differential genes between our clusters and identified a group of 26 genes (e.g. cdkn1 ccl2 tnf) that exhibited a strong pearson correlation across the metacells’ log2 footprint expression of the 200 most variable genes excluding genes associated with cell 179 1609–1622.e1–e6 december 12 2019 e5 mitochondria and stress that were filtered from these lists in advance.microglia transcriptional heterogeneity within species related to figure 4 (a-e) cell-to-cell correlation plots of microglia and corresponding heatmaps for most differentially expressed genes.]
Patterns of correlation between gene expressions within and between microglia clusters, revealing distinct subtypes in human microglia compared to other species.

Text 420
10.1016/j.cell.2019.11.010
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 5. inter-species comparison of homeostatic microglia uncovers species differences (a) scatterplot showing inter-species microglia gene expression. gene expression is calculated as log (sum of umi)/number of cells. the genes related to the nonhomeostatic subtypes of human microglia (from figure 4) were removed from the analysis. a subset of differentially expressed genes and marker genes is highlighted in red. (b) spearman correlation of scrna-seq expression (umi count) of susceptibility genes for (from left to right) ad susceptibility genes, pd susceptibility genes, schizophrenia (scz), and huntington’s disease (hd). species from top to bottom: human versus macaque, human versus marmoset, human versus rat, human versus mouse, human versus bmr, and human versus hamster. (c) bar plots showing average and ranked scrna-seq gene expression (percentile) across human, macaque, rat, mouse, and hamster in ad, pd, scz, and hd. error bars show sd.']. Reference sentences:[in contrast we observed a considerably smaller number of differentially expressed genes between human and macaque microglia with most of the differentially expressed genes related to metabolic pathways such as nad kinase (nadk; soluble vitamin metabolism) and beta-carotene oxygen- ase 2 (bco2; carotenoid oxidization) (figure 5a).we compared the gene expression of neurode- generative disease susceptibility genes from gwass of human microglia with those of other mammalian species (star methods; figure 5b).expression of pd and ad-associated a b c 0 5 10 15 0 5 10 15 hamster log((sum of umi)/# cells) fcrls fgr gns hpgd laptm4b a2m c3 sorl1 spp1 0 5 10 15 0 5 10 15 mouse log((sum of umi)/# cells) c1qc fcrls hpgd rnase4 a2m ch25h sorl1 spp1 0 5 10 15 0 5 10 15 bmr log((sum of umi)/# cells) c1qa c1qc hpgd laptm4b plac8 sod3 a2m sorl1 spp1 0 5 10 15 0 5 10 15 rat log((sum of umi)/# cells) c1qc ctss fcer1g fcrls a2m ch25h spp1 0 5 10 15 0 5 10 15 macaque log((sum of umi)/# cells) human log((sum of umi)/# cells) c5ar1 bco2 cfd cd84 cpvl myof ptgs2 spp1 human log((sum of umi)/# cells) human log((sum of umi)/# cells) human log((sum of umi)/# cells) human log((sum of umi)/# cells) rs=0.59 rs=0.44 rs=0.38 rs=0.53 rs=0.18 ad 0 5 10 15 0 5 10 15 0.34 rs= rs= 0.37 rs=0.02 rs=0.03 rs=0.16 rs=-0.16 hd 0.021 rs= rs=0.73 rs=0.37 rs=0.40 rs=0.61 rs=0.16 pd 0.48 rs= rs=0.58 rs=0.44 rs=0.41 rs=0.46 rs=0.19 scz 0.13 rs= nadk ad 0.5 1.0 percentile spp1 0.5 1.0 percentile sorl1 0.5 1.0 percentile reep4 c3 srsf7 trim38 slc2a5 tspo adam28 lpar5 pik3r5 st6gal1 msr1 vsig4 0.5 1.0 percentile clec7a 0.5 1.0 percentile human macaque rat mouse hamster cpvl human macaque rat mouse hamster scin human macaque rat mouse hamster human macaque rat mouse hamster scz pd hd irak3 gimap8 sfmbt2 figure 5.cell 179 1609–1622 december 12 2019 1617 genes in human microglia showed the highest correlation with macaque (pd r = 0.73; ad r = 0.59) (figure 5b).characterization of microglia species-specific and disease-associated pathways related to figure 5 (a-b) heatmap representation and clustering of most differentiated genes (k = 12) of (a) a deconvoluted bulk of microglia and (b) an average of scrna-seq expression (umis per cell/number of cells) of microglia across species (row).]
Patterns of gene expression correlation between different species and neurodegenerative diseases susceptibility genes.

Text 421
10.1016/j.cell.2019.11.025
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure s4. in situ sequencing experimental features, related to figure 5 (a) dimensionality reduction and clustering of the scrna-seq data based only on the 69 genes included in the iss panel. (b) tsne plot as in (a) with cluster numbers converted to matching ids and colors as in figure 3b based on their percentage of overlap. (c) heatmap showing the percentage of overlap. percentages are calculated as the number of cells in a 69-gene cluster divided by the total number of cells in the best matching original cluster. original cluster 13 (immune cells) is not seen in the 69-gene cluster formation as no markers were designed for it. (d) correlations among tissue sections of the same developmental time point. analyses are based on the gene expression of all genes included in the gene panel. 4.5-5 pcw_1, 4.5-5 pcw_2 and 4.5-5 pcw_3 indicate three tissue sections from the 4.5-5 pcw heart; 6.5 pcw_1, and 6.5 pcw_2 indicate two tissue sections from the 6.5 pcw heart; 9 pcw_1, 9 pcw_2 and 9 pcw_3 are three tissue sections from the 9 pcw heart. to check goodness-of-fit measure for linear regression models, r-square, coefficient of determination is applied. value = 1 indicates that the model explains all the data around its mean.']. Reference sentences:[]
Summary: Correlations among gene expressions in different tissue sections at the same developmental time point.

Text 422
10.1016/j.cell.2019.11.025
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 3. single-cell analysis of a 6.5–7 pcw human embryonic heart (a) scatterplot showing pearson correlation between aggregated gene counts from cells of the 6.5–7 pcw heart sample and aggregated gene counts from spots of the 6.5 pcw heart sample. (b) dimensionality reduction and clustering of 3,717 single cells from the 6.5–7 pcw heart colored by cluster affiliation. the identified cell types, which are annotated based on marker gene information, are indicated on the right. (c) tsne plot shown in (b) where cells are colored based on their origin in the respective two heart fractions obtained prior to cell dissociation. the dashed line in fraction (i) illustrates cluster 1 (ventricular cardiomyocytes), which is present to a considerable larger extent in fraction (ii). the dashed lines in fraction (ii) illustrate absent clusters 5, 7, and 14 (smooth muscle cells/fibroblast-like, atrial cardiomyocytes, and cardiac neural crest and schwann progenitor cells), which are present in fraction (i).']. Reference sentences:[a strong correlation was observed (r = 0.93; figure 3a) justifying the biological com- parison.finally we performed dimensionality reduction and clustering of the gene expression profiles of the two single-cell frac- tions and identified 15 cell clusters (figure 3b) which we categorized into cell types based on marker gene expression (table s3).certain cell clusters were only detected in cell fraction (i) (figure 3c) suggesting rich cell diversity in the upper part of the heart which contains the oft the main part of the atria the av sub-epicardial mesenchyme the valvular appa- ratus and the mediastinal tissue with the pulmonary veins.by analyzing the iss patterns of these genes within the oft at the three developmental a b c figure 3.gene signals are displayed as symbols with colors grouped according to their cluster belonging as seen in figure 3b.each pie proportion is color coded as in figure 3b.each data point (i.e. cell) is represented by a pie chart color coded as in figure 3b.the image displays all 20920 cells from one 6.5 pcw tissue section colored by their cell type identity as in figure 3b.statistical details of this analysis can be found at the section ‘‘single-cell gene expression analysis of a 6.5-7 pcw human embryonic heart’’ of results and in figure 3b.statistical details of the clusters iden- tified in the single-cell data can be found at the section ‘‘single-cell gene expression analysis of a 6.5-7 pcw human embryonic heart’’ of results and in figure 3b and table s3.statistical details of this analysis can be found at the sec- tions ‘‘single-cell gene expression analysis of a 6.5-7 pcw human embryonic heart’’ of results and in figures s1d–s1j and figure 3a.scrna-seq data of the 6.5-7 pcw heart related to figure 3 (a-b) distribution of the number of genes (a) and transcripts (b) detected per cell.(c) tsne plot shown in figure 3b but colored based on cell doublet and singlet information.(b) tsne plot as in (a) with cluster numbers converted to matching ids and colors as in figure 3b based on their percentage of overlap.cell cluster are named and color-coded according to figure 3b and number of identified single cells of each cluster are listed.]
Summary: Correlation between gene counts in different heart fractions, clustering of single cells based on gene expression, and cell type diversity in heart fractions.

Text 423
10.1371/journal.pgen.1008506
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 6. rna-fish reveals cell cycle progression of gene expression and distinct pattern among expressing cells for markers sera4 (cluster 1), exp2 (cluster 2), and rap1 (cluster 3). a) the percentage of cells expressing each marker gene was determined for the morphological stage of the parasite and plotted over time, indicating distinct cell cycle progression of gene expression with some overlap between markers during stage transition. the number of expressing cells per stage is indicated by n. b) representative images for expression of markers during cell cycle progression, with parasites expressing exp2 (red), sera4 (green), and rap1 (magenta). scale bar: 5 μm. c) the pair-wise correlation between expression values measured for rna-fish markers sera4 and rap1 reveal wide variation in expression levels and separate expression. values are relative fluorescence units. d) the pair-wise correlation between expression values measured for rna-fish markers rap1 and exp2 reveal wide variation in expression levels and separate expression. values are relative fluorescence units.']. Reference sentences:[as expected for genes in clusters 1 and 3 sera4 and rap1 showed a stage-specific expression (fig 6a).consistent with the previous expression data exp2 exhibited a variable and more complex gene expression pattern through the idc (fig 6a).it was the only marker expressed in merozoites (fig 6a and 6b).in addition exp2 was also expressed highly in early trophozoites as well as late dividing schizonts (fig 6a and 6b).however our rna-fish analysis suggests that its expres- sion primarily occurs only in schizonts 38–44 hours post-invasion (fig 6a and 6b).addition- ally in late schizonts the expression of exp2 was separate from rap1 which was expressed in schizonts more than four hours from bursting (fig 6a 6b and 6d).]
Distinct patterns of gene expression correlation among single cells during cell cycle progression, with separate expression of markers sera4, exp2, and rap1.

Text 424
10.1038/s41467-019-13657-6
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 8 factors that maintain proliferative and stem-like phenotypes after vismodegib. a correlation plot after imputation of data, showing expression of gli1 on the x-axis and ptch1 on the y-axis, in vehicle- and vismodegib-treated tumors graphed separately. each dot represents an individual cell. b correlation plot after imputation of data, showing expression of sufu on the x-axis and gli1 on the y-axis, in vehicle and vismodegib-treated tumors graphed separately as in a. c t-sne projection of sox2+ cells from vehicle-treated and vismodegib-treated tumors, directed by ica with expression of fabp7 and hes1 color coded. d t-sne projection of sox2+ cells from the five vehicle-treated and five vismodegib-treated tumors, directed by ica, with expression of nes, vim and yfp indicated. e bar plots comparing the proportions of sox2+ cells expressing indicated markers in each of the five vehicle-treated or vismodegib-treated tumors. error bars are sem. the yfp+ fractions are indicated.']. Reference sentences:[in these tumors hes1+ cells were as rare as in tumors treated for 3 days and prb was significantly reduced in the hes1+ population (supplementary fig 8a).in contrast to hes1+ cells myod1+ cells continued to proliferate in tumors treated for 14 days showing a statistically significant decrease in relative fraction but no decrease in prb+ fraction (supplementary fig 8b).in contrast sufu showed a statistically significant positive correlation with gli1 in vehicle-treated tumors (r = 0.406 p < 1 × 10−15; hypoth- esis testing of correlation by t-distribution) but a statistically significant negative correlation in vismodegib-treated tumors (r = −0.566 p < 1 × 10−15; hypothesis testing of correlation by t-distribution; fig 8c).ica-directed analysis of the sox2+ populations of vehicle-treated and vismodegib-treated tumors showed that the vehicle-treated tumors contained a significant population of cgnp-like sox2+ cells that were hes1+ and fabp7− (41.1 ± 2.5%; five replicates) and that this population was specifically depleted by vismodegib (5.1 ± 2.9%; five replicates; fc = 0.1245 p = 1.5 × 10−5; student’s t-test; fig 8d e).in contrast the oligodendrocytic opc-like astrocytic and ap-like subsets of sox2+ cells were relatively preserved in vismodegib-treated tumors (fig 8d e).comparing sox2+ cells in vehicle-treated and vismodegib-treated tumors and stratifying using yfp expression and the markers identified by vanner et al.31 we identified subsets that were relatively depleted or enriched by vismodegib treatment including sox2+ cells of tumor lineage (fig 8f).]
Patterns of positive and negative correlations between different gene expressions in vehicle- and vismodegib-treated tumors.

Text 425
10.1038/s41556-019-0439-6
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 6 | inference of cellular interactions from single-cell gene expression data by rna-magnet. a, t-sne highlighting the cell type each cell is most likely to physically interact with (rna-magnet location, indicated by colour) and the estimated strength of adhesion (rna-magnet adhesiveness, indicated by opacity). n=7,497 cells. b, comparison of the estimated strength of adhesion (rna-magnet score) with the degree to which each cell type is differentially localized between niches (spatial transcriptomics; see also fig 3). n=25 cell types are shown, all hspc subtypes were summarized as a single population. the pearson’s correlation (r) and its associated p value are shown. c, heatmap depicting a summary of the inferred localization based on rna-magnet (left). the fraction of cells assigned to a certain niche is colour-coded according to the legend. pearson’s correlation between the rna-magnet estimate of localization and the lcm-seq estimate of localization across n=3 niches (right). see also extended data fig 9d.']. Reference sentences:[our approach makes use of random priming to cope with low quality of input rna as encountered in fixed bm sections (extended data fig 6a; see methods).for images acquired under the laser-capture dissection microscope and selected areas see extended data fig 6b.we applied lcm-seq to 76 microdissected regions collected from the diaphyseal bm based on the presence or absence of sinusoidal and arteriolar blood vessels or based on the distance from the endosteum to characterize the endosteal sub- endosteal arteriolar sinusoidal and non-vascular niche composi- tion (fig 3a and extended data fig 6b).marker gene sets for haematopoietic populations schwann cells and myofibroblasts were not significantly associated with any of the defined niches suggesting that these cell types are either rela- tively evenly distributed across niches (haematopoietic populations) or insufficiently covered in the lcm-seq data (schwann cells and myofibroblasts; fig 3c and extended data fig 6de).arteriolar fibroblasts seem to be the cellular source for the collagen layer of the tunica externa surrounding arte- rioles (extended data fig 6c) and probably overlap with previously described peri-arteriolar pdpn-expressing stromal cells33.to investigate whether rna-magnet is able to recapitu- late the spatial relationships of bm cell types we introduced four anchor populations representing the following niches: osteoblasts for the endosteal niche sinusoidal ecs for the sinusoidal niche as well as arterial ecs and smooth muscle cells to represent the arterio- lar niches (fig 6a).the predicted adhesiveness of bm populations to distinct niches correlated strongly with their degree of differen- tial localization as measured by spatial transcriptomics (fig 6b).rna-magnet location rna-magnet adhesiveness endosteum sinusoidal arteriolar (vessel) arteriolar (muscle) 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 cell fraction fig 6 | inference of cellular interactions from single-cell gene expression data by rna-magnet.for each parameter set rna-magnet location estimates were summarized per cell type and compared to the summarized location estimate displayed in fig 6c.the asterisk indicates the parameter set used in fig 6c.see also main fig 6c.]
Summary: Correlation between cell type interactions and adhesion strength, validated by spatial transcriptomics, inferred from single-cell gene expression data.

Text 426
10.1038/s42255-019-0152-6
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 6 | progenitor clusters specific to the vat derived from individuals with obesity. a, re-clustering of vat-specific progenitors (9,847 cells) from the complete sample set. b, violin plots showing the expression density of msln and cfd in six vp clusters. the y axis indicates log-transformed expression values and the width indicates the number of cells expressing the particular gene. c, vat progenitor cells labelled based on mitochondrial gene distribution: group 0 (grey, 5,018 cells) shows cells with mitochondrial gene expression≤ 5%, group 1 (blue, 4,100 cells) represents 6–14% expression and group 2 (red, 729 cells) represents 15–24% expression. see also supplementary fig 5. d, pearson correlation of fasting glucose levels (mmol l−1) and vpm cell proportion across all samples from 12 individuals. e, expression pattern of ucp1, msln and wt1 from bulk rna-seq showing the change in expression in mature adipocytes.']. Reference sentences:[clustering of the vp cells resulted in six clusters (fig 6a and supplementary table 20); cells expressing cfd (referred to as vpc and corresponding to vp4–vp6) versus msln (referred to as vpm and corresponding to vp1–vp3) were clus- tered separately (fig 6b).specifically we found that the vpm cells had comparatively high mitochondrial expres- sion (that is 6–20%) whereas vpcs showed a consistent pattern of low (that is ≤ 5%) expression of mitochondrial genes (fig 6c).to test this we first correlated vpm cell proportion with fasting glucose levels and found a significant negative correlation (pearson r = −0.64 p = 0.025 fig 6d).we then used bulk svf and whole tissue from vat and sat to validate the induction of ucp1 during differentiation to mature adipocytes; by contrast the expres- sion of msln and wt1 peaks in progenitors (fig 6e).in addition we noted a strong negative correlation in vat between ucp1 and both mesothelial markers (msln versus ucp1 pearson r = −0.72 p = 0.018 and wt1 versus ucp1 pearson r = −0.72 p = 0.019; supplementary fig 6).we also noted a significant positive correla- tion between ucp1 and irx3 in vat (pearson r = 0.85 p = 1.71 × 10−3) in line with recent reports showing the induction of irx3 in the browning process of adipocytes35 (supplementary fig 6).however as we observed a negative correlation between the proportions of vpm cells and met- abolic disease status (fig 6d) we proposed that ucp1-expressing pre-adipocytes derived from vpm progenitors may be more prev- alent in healthy tissue early in development.source data are available online for fig 3 5 and 6 and supplementary fig 6.]
Summary: Correlation between cell types, gene expressions, and metabolic markers in adipose tissue progenitors.

Text 427
10.1016/j.cell.2019.11.036
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 4. single-cell rna-seq analyses of parental tumors and corresponding gbos (a) umap plot of single-cell rna expression from up-8036, up-8165-c, up-8165-pv, and up-8167 parental tumors and corresponding gbos. neoplastic cells are identified and colored by the presence of cnas (see figure s4a). non-neoplastic cell clusters shared by cells from different patients and corresponding gbos are colored and marked: 1 (microphage/microglia cluster), 2 (t cell cluster), 3 (stromal cell cluster), and 4 (mature oligodendrocyte cluster). (b) umap plot of single-cell rna expression from four parental tumors and corresponding gbos. cells are colored by patients and subregions. (c) heatmap of gene expression of selected macrophage/microglia marker genes and cytokines in the macrophage/microglia cell cluster (1 in a). (d) histogram of microglia versus macrophage gene signature expression in cells from the macrophage/microglia cell population from all parental tumors and all gbos at 2 weeks. (e) confocal images of immunostaining for microphage/microglia marker iba1 and t cell marker cd3 in the parental tumor and corresponding gbo at 2 weeks. scale bar, 50 mm. (f) umap plot of up-8036 parental tumor and gbos at 2 and 8 weeks colored by samples. (g) umap plots of up-8036 parental tumor and gbos at 2 weeks colored by cluster. the same cluster number is listed in (h) and (j). (h) heatmap of gene expression pearson correlation of clusters identified in the up-8036 parental tumor (rows) and gbos at 2 weeks (columns) with hierarchical clustering by euclidian distance. (i) heatmap of gene expression of cluster-specific markers in up-8036-gbos with columns corresponding to (h). see table s4 for the detailed gene list. (j) comparison of cell clusters in up-8036 gbos at 2 weeks (corresponding to that in h) with normal adult brain cells identified by single-nuclei rna-seq of human adult brains in lake et al. (2018) (l, top panel) and habib et al. (2017) (h, bottom panel) with marker gene enrichment analysis. opc, oligodendrocyte precursor cell. see also figure s4 and tables s1, s2, and s4.']. Reference sentences:[macrophage/microglia cells showed similar expres- sion of many immune-related genes in the parental tumors and gbos at 2 weeks including cytokines such as tnf il1b and tgfb1 suggesting that certain features of the tumor microenvi- ronment were maintained within gbos (figure 4c).we confirmed the presence of macrophage/microglia and t cells within tumors and derived gbos by immunohistology for iba1 and cd3 respectively (figure 4e).for up-8036-gbos we identified neoplastic popula- tions of proliferating cells oligodendrocyte precursor cell (opc)- like astrocyte-like oligodendrocyte-like and neuron-like cells (figure 4i) similar to results recently reported in primary tumors (neftel et al. 2019).comparing their transcriptome profiles to two independent single-nuclei rna-seq datasets for adult hu- man non-tumor brain cells (habib et al. 2017; lake et al. 2018) revealed that these neoplastic cells share similarities with different cell types in the adult human brain (figure 4j).single-cell rna-seq analyses of gbos and corresponding parental tumors related to figure 4 (a) plots of cna analysis of parental tumors and derived gbos.]
Patterns of gene expression correlation between cell clusters in parental tumors and gbos, with similarities to normal brain cells.

Text 428
10.1016/j.cell.2019.11.036
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure s4. single-cell rna-seq analyses of gbos and corresponding parental tumors, related to figure 4 (a) plots of cna analysis of parental tumors and derived gbos. macrophage/microglia and t cells in each sample were used as the non-neoplastic reference. (b) umap plot of up-8165-c and up-8165-pv parental tumors and gbos at 2 and 24 weeks colored by sample (left panel). the right panel shows the expression of gpnmb. note cells with high levels of gpnmb expression were only present in up-8165-c tumor and derived gbos, but not in up-8165-pv tumor and derived gbos. (c) umap plots of up-8165-c and up-8166-pv parental tumors and gbos at 2 weeks colored by cluster. the same cluster number is listed in (d) and (f). (d) heatmap of gene expression pearson correlation of clusters identified in up-8165-c and up-8165-pv parental tumors (rows) and gbos at 2 weeks (columns) with hierarchical clustering by euclidian distance. (e) heatmap of gene expression of cluster-specific markers in up-8165-c and up-8165-pv gbos with columns corresponding to that of (d). see table s4 for the detailed list. (f) comparison of cell clusters in up-8165c-gbos and up-8165pv-gbos at 2 weeks (corresponding to that in d) with normal adult brain cells identified by single-nuclei rna-seq of human adult brains in lake et al. (2018) (l, top panel) and habib et al. (2017) (h, bottom panel) with marker gene enrichment analysis. opc: oligodendrocyte precursor cell. (g) umap plot of up-8167 parental tumors and corresponding gbos at 2 and 24 weeks colored by sample. (h) umap plots of up-8167 parental tumors and corresponding gbos at 2 weeks colored by cluster. the same cluster number is listed in (i) and (k). (i) heatmap of gene expression pearson correlation of clusters identified in up-8167 parental tumors (rows) and gbos at 2 weeks (columns) with hierarchical clustering by euclidian distance. (j) heatmap of gene expression of cluster-specific markers in up-8167-gbos with columns corresponding to that of (i). see table s4 for the detailed list. (k) comparison of cell clusters in up-8167 gbos at 2 weeks (corresponding to that in i) with normal adult brain cells identified by single-nuclei rna-seq of human adult brains in lake et al. (2018) (l, top panel) and habib et al. (2017) (h, bottom panel) with marker gene enrichment analysis.']. Reference sentences:[]
Summary: Correlation patterns of gene expression clusters in parental tumors and derived gbos were analyzed, revealing distinct patterns between different samples.

Text 429
10.1038/s41556-019-0446-7
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 6 | the cellular basis of hf caused by coronary heart disease (chf). a, ratio changes of cell clusters in chf versus normal heart. only cell clusters with ratio changes above the median number are shown. b, correlation analysis of potentially matched pairs between the ligands secreted by changed cell clusters (shown in a) and enriched biological behaviours of cms in chf. c, heat map of the expression of genes indicated in correlation analysis (shown in b) across changed cell clusters (shown in a). source data are available online. d, the sum of all of the matched ligands (shown in c) expressed in different cell clusters.']. Reference sentences:[fb1 possessed the highest frequency of putative interactions with other cell types in the la whereas ec3 (ackr1+) had the highest frequency in the lv suggesting that the chambers leverage distinct cellular interaction networks and cell hubs to maintain homeostasis (fig 4ij extended data fig 6ab).indeed although many recep- tors (such as pdgfra pdgfrb flt1 kdr notch3 cd9 tek and cdh2) and ligands (such as dcn bgn and lum) were shared some were specific to either the la (such as axl notch2 and sfrp1) or the lv (such as egfr notch4 and col3a1; extended data fig 6c–f).active engagement of ncms in hf to elucidate the functions of ncms in hf we first defined major ncm subclusters that decreased (mp4 ec3 fb3 smc4 fb2 and smc1) or ones that increased (fb1 smc2 smc5 ec5 mp1 ec4 fb5 smc3 and fb4) in chf versus normal heart (fig 6a).after correlating ligands that are specifically released from these changed subclusters with biological changes of cms in chf we identified multiple factors that potentially affected cm biology and there- fore chf progression (fig 6bc).ec3_clu ec3_plat ec3_spink5 ec4_igf2 ec4_lgals3 fb1_cfh fb1_col6a2 fb1_cst3 fb1_cxcl14 fb1_lamc1 fb1_myoc fb1_ogn fb1_pdgfd fb2_ccl11 fb2_col4a4 fb2_nppb fb2_nppc fb3_gpi fb3_sfrp1 fb3_vegfb mp4_ccl3 mp4_xcl1 smc1_agt smc1_sparc smc1_thbs4 smc4_c4b smc4_igfbp5 ecm −receptor interaction pi3k −akt age −rage signalling pathway chemokine signalling pathway glucose homeostasis contractile fibre mitochondrial inner membrane angiogenesis fibroblast proliferation ec fb mp smc chf cm antigen processing pyruvate metabolism complement and coagulation regulation of smooth muscle cell proliferation fb3_ctsb 2 chf change a b c d fb1 smc2 smc1 smc4 fb2 ec3fb3 mp4 smc5 ec5 mp1 ec4 fb5 smc3 fb4 1 –1 –2 up down olfm1 postn spink5 tll1 plat clu stc1 st6gal1 tcn2 nppa nppc nppb sfrp1 ccl3 xcl1 egflam sbspon sod3 ntn4 igfbp4 heg1 islr il33 lgals3 igf2 psap timp2 spon2 myoc ltbp1 lamc1 cxcl14 fbn1 pcolce col6a2 matn2 col4a4 gpi ctsb gpx3 vegfb lgals3bp lgals1 tgfbr3 ccl11 spock1 cst3 prf1 agt cpe col27a1 sparc thbs4 adamts4 c4b serpini1 igfbp5 igfbp7 sparcl1 isg15 ltbp4 pdgfd mfap5 cfh c1qtnf7 mfap4 cilp ogn pi16 prelp mamdc2 fgfbp2 3 down up 2 1 0 –1 expression –2 –3 chf versus normal all ligands 3000 2000 1000 0 ec3 ec4 fb3 fb2 smc1 smc4 smc2 fb4 mp4 mp1 fb1 sum smc1 smc4 fb4 ec3 mp4 fb2 mp1 fb1 ec4 smc2 fb4 log2[ratio] 0 up down fig 6 | the cellular basis of hf caused by coronary heart disease (chf).the network graph of functional terms and ligands was drawn using r package network (v.1.13.0.1) sna (v.2.4) and ggally (v.1.4.0; fig 6b and extended data fig 9b.).for numerical source data see source data extended data fig 6.]
Patterns related to correlation between ligands secreted by changed cell clusters and enriched biological behaviors of cells in chf are shown in the figure.

Text 430
10.1038/s41587-019-0387-5
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 5 | compact mismatched sgrna library targeting essential genes. a, design of the library. for activity bins lacking a previously measured sgrna, new mismatched sgrnas were included according to predicted activity. b, distribution of relative activities from the large-scale library (gray) and the compact library (purple) in k562 cells. the dashed line represents sgrnas that were selected on the basis of predicted activity from the deep-learning model. c, comparison of relative activities of mismatched sgrnas in hela and k562 cells. marginal histograms show the distributions of relative activities along the corresponding axes. data are from n=9,514 sgrnas; r2=squared pearson correlation coefficient.']. Reference sentences:[this linear model explained less variance in rela- tive activities than the cnn model (r2 = 0.52 supplementary fig 5ab) implying that our feature set was incomplete and/or sgrna activity was partly determined by nonlinear combinations of fea- tures; nonetheless the relative activities predicted by the different models were well correlated (r2 = 0.74; supplementary fig 5c).consistent with our earlier observations mismatch position and type were assigned the largest weights in the model although other features such as gc content and the identities of flanking bases up to three nucleotides from the mismatch contributed to the pre- dictions as well (supplementary fig 5de).for any given position the type of mismatch contributed differentially to the prediction which was especially pronounced in the sgrna intermediate region (supplementary fig 5f).if a bin did not contain a previously measured sgrna we selected one from the cnn model ensemble predictions fil- tered to exclude sgrnas with off-target binding potential (fig 5a supplementary fig 6a–c and supplementary table 10).whereas the major- ity of mismatched sgrnas in the large-scale screen were inactive relative activities in the compact library were evenly distributed (fig 5b and supplementary fig 6i).relative sgrna activities measured in k562 cells were well correlated with those measured in the large-scale screen (r2 = 0.7) and relative activities were also well correlated between k562 and hela cells (r2 = 0.59; fig 5c).]
Summary: Correlation between relative activities of mismatched sgrnas in different cells, influenced by various features including mismatch position and type.

Text 431
10.1038/s41587-019-0387-5
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 4 | neural network predictions of sgrna activity. a, schematic diagram of a singly mismatched sgrna feature array (xi) and the cnn architecture trained on pairs of such arrays and their corresponding relative activities (yi). black squares in xi represent the value 1 (the presence of a base at the indicated position); white represents 0. the mean prediction from 20 independently trained models was used to assign a final prediction (ŷ) to each sgrna in the hold-out validation set (orange). b, comparison of measured relative growth phenotypes from the large-scale screen and predicted activities assigned by the neural network. marginal histograms show distributions of relative activities along the corresponding axes. data are from n=5,241 sgrnas; r2=squared pearson correlation coefficient. c, distribution of pearson r values (predicted versus measured relative activity) for each sgrna series in the validation set. data are from n=406 series. d, comparison of measured relative activity (relative knockdown) in the gfp experiment and predicted relative sgrna activity. two outliers with lower-than-predicted activity are annotated with their respective mismatch position and type. predictions are shown as mean±s.d. from the 20-model ensemble. data are from n=57 sgrnas; r2=squared pearson correlation coefficient.']. Reference sentences:[we constructed our cnn model using two convolution steps a pooling step and a three-layer fully connected neural network (fig 4a and supplementary fig 4a).as inputs the model received sgrna relative activities paired with nucleotide sequences rep- resented by binarized three-dimensional arrays denoting the genomic sequence of the target and the associated sgrna mismatch (fig 4a and supplementary table 8).after optimizing hyperparam- eters using a cross-validated randomized grid search on the training dataset (80% of randomly selected sgrna series; supplementary fig 4b–d and methods) we trained 20 independent equivalently initialized models for eight epochs which minimized loss without extensive over-fitting (supplementary fig 4e).predicted and mea- sured sgrna relative activities for the validation sgrna set (the remaining 20% of series that were not used to optimize parameters or train the model) were well correlated (r2 = 0.65) with mean pre- dictions of the 20-model ensemble outperforming all individual models (fig 4b and supplementary fig 4f).model accu- racy varied by mismatch position and type with the highest accu- racies corresponding to mismatches in the pam-proximal seed region (supplementary fig 4gh).the accuracy of cnn predic- tions showed no correlation with off-target specificity scores sug- gesting that off-target effects did not substantially contribute to the phenotypes we measured (supplementary fig 4i).despite the fact that the model was trained on relative growth phenotypes it accu- rately predicted relative fluorescence values measured in the gfp experiment (fig 4d) further supporting the hypothesis that rela- tive growth phenotypes report on biophysical attributes of sgrna– dna interactions.on the basis of the accuracy of predictions for the validation set we estimated that for any given gene sampling three sgrnas with predicted rela- tive activity between 0.37 and 0.63 would yield at least one sgrna of intermediate activity (0.1–0.9) over 95% of the time (supplementary fig 4j–m).]
Patterns of correlation between predicted and measured relative activities of sgrnas in single-cell data.

Text 432
10.1038/s41587-019-0387-5
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 2 | a large-scale crispri screen identifies factors governing mismatched sgrna activity. a, design of a large-scale mismatched sgrna library. b, schematic diagram of a pooled crispri screen to determine activities of mismatched sgrnas. oligo, oligonucleotide. c, growth phenotypes (γ) in k562 and jurkat cells for four sgrna series, with perfectly matched sgrnas shown in darker colors and mismatched sgrnas shown in corresponding lighter colors. phenotypes represent the mean of two replicate screens. differences in absolute phenotypes likely reflect cell-type-specific essentiality. a γ of 0 was equivalent to the average phenotype of nontargeting control sgrnas. d, comparison of mismatched sgrna relative activities in k562 and jurkat cells. marginal histograms depict distributions of relative activities along the corresponding axes. data are from n=41,512 sgrnas; r2=squared pearson correlation coefficient. e, distribution of mismatched sgrna relative activities stratified by position of the mismatch. position −1 is immediately adjacent to the pam. categories contain n=1,372–3,374 sgrnas. f, distribution of mismatched sgrna relative activities stratified by type of mismatch, grouped by mismatches located in positions −19 to −13 (pam-distal region), positions −12 to −9 (intermediate region), and positions −8 to −1 (pam-proximal or seed region). division into these regions was based on previous work13,16 and the patterns in panel e. categories contain n=437–2,342 sgrnas. g, comparison of mean apparent on-rates measured in vitro for mismatched variants of a single sgrna29 and mean relative activities from a large-scale screen. values are compared for identical combinations of mismatch type and mismatch position; mean relative activities were calculated by averaging relative activities for all mismatched sgrnas with a given combination. data are from n=57 unique combinations of mismatch type and position; r2=squared pearson correlation coefficient. lines in violin plots e and f denote distribution quartiles.']. Reference sentences:[each individual series herein referred to as an allelic series contains the original perfectly matched sgrna and 22–23 variants harboring one or two mismatches (the first nucleotide of the sgrna was held as a g regardless of its match in the genome; fig 2a supplementary table 2 and methods).we then measured crispri growth phenotypes (γ; a more negative value indicates a stronger growth defect) for each sgrna in both k562 and jurkat cells using pooled screens1826 (fig 2b supplementary fig 2ab and methods).growth phenotypes of targeting sgrnas were well correlated in replicate screens (supplementary fig 2ab and supplementary tables 3–4) and recapitulated previously reported phenotypes14 (supplementary fig 2c).mismatched sgrnas mediated a range of phenotypes span- ning from that of the corresponding perfectly matched sgrna to those of negative control sgrnas (fig 2c).to account for differ- ences in absolute growth phenotypes we normalized the phenotype of each mismatched sgrna to that of its corresponding perfectly matched sgrna (relative activity fig 2b) and filtered for series in which the perfectly matched sgrna had a strong growth pheno- type (see methods).relative activities measured in k562 and jurkat cells were well correlated (fig 2d) regardless of differences in abso- lute phenotype of the perfectly matched sgrnas (supplementary fig 2de).although the majority of mismatched sgrnas were inactive (fig 2d) particularly if they contained two mismatches (supplementary fig 2f) approximately 25% of mismatched sgrnas exhibited intermediate activity (relative activity 0.1–0.9).as expected mismatch position was a strong determinant of activity with mismatches closer to the pam leading to lower relative activity (fig 2e).in agreement with patterns of cas9 off-target activity2728 sgrnas with rg:dt mismatches (a to g mutations in the sgrna) retained substantial activity even for mismatches close to the pam (fig 2f).for example sgrnas with higher gc content or for which the first invariant g matched the genome retained higher activity for mismatches located nine or more bases upstream of the pam (positions −9 to −19) and mismatch-surrounding g nucleotides were associated with marginally higher activity for mismatches in the intermediate region (supplementary fig 2g–i).crispri activi- ties of mismatched sgrnas were moderately correlated with cas9 cutting scores in the presence of mismatches (cutting frequency determination (cfd) scores27) but cas9 cutting appears to be less sensitive to many types of mismatches (supplementary fig 2j).in contrast the crispri activities of mismatched sgrnas were well correlated with previous in vitro measurements of dcas9 binding on-rates in the presence of mismatches29 (fig 2g).the activities of mismatched sgrnas in crispri thus seem to be determined by general biophysical rules; a premise further supported by the high correlation of relative activities obtained in different cell lines (fig 2d).overall 86.7% of sgrna series contained at least two sgrnas with intermediate activity (relative activity 0.1–0.9; supplementary fig 2k).note that crispr cutting seems to be less sensitive to mismatches (see also supplementary fig 2j) and thus specificity scores calculated using cfd scores are frequently lower than those calculated using relative crispri activities.]
Patterns related to correlation between mismatched sgRNA activities in different cell types, influenced by mismatch position and type.

Text 433
10.1038/s41588-019-0566-9
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 2 | tracking basal- and classical-related signatures with scrna-seq. a, umap plots of 1,987epithelial tumor cells clustered from sample 100070. known marker genes were used to identify non-epithelial cells (see extended data fig 2), which were then removed from downstream analysis. seven single-cell clusters belonging to the tumor were identified in this sample. this workflow was applied to an additional 14cases (not shown). b, heatmap of marker genes identified in each of the seven tumor clusters (gene list provided in supplementary table 3). scores for the tumor (signatures 1, 2, 6 and 10) and emt signature are shown for each cell. c, left: scatter plot of a representative tumor sample (same as in a) showing signature2 score versus signature6 score, with each dot representing a single tumor cell (two-sided spearman correlation). right: heatmap showing spearman correlation coefficients for pairwise comparisons among the four tumor signatures (signatures 1, 2, 6 and 10) across 15samples. gray shading denotes correlation without statistical significance (holm–bonferroni adjusted p>0.05). cl, classical signature (signature 1 or 6); ba, basal signature (signature 2 or 10). d, left: spearman correlation plot of a representative tumor sample (same as in a) showing signature 2 score versus emt score, with each dot representing a single tumor cell (spearman correlation). right: heatmap of spearman correlation coefficients of emt score versus each of the four tumor signatures (signatures 1, 2, 6 and 10) across 15single-cell samples. gray shading represents correlation without statistical significance (adjusted p>0.05, as in c).']. Reference sentences:[the fifth subtype was inconsistently classified by all previous schemes due to the presence of multiple expression signatures (fig 1a extended data fig 2 and supplementary note).in the tumor shown in fig 2ab we observed seven single-cell clusters: clusters 0 1 and 3 were enriched for basal-like signatures clusters 2 4 and 6 were enriched for classical signatures and cluster 5 did not show high scores for any of the signatures (fig 2b).pairwise compari- sons of basal- and classical-related expression signatures showed that they were negatively correlated at the single-cell level (fig 2c; n = 15 samples).within single cells the emt program was positively correlated with basal-like signatures and negatively correlated with classical signatures (fig 2d).]
Summary: Single-cell correlation analysis revealed negative correlation between basal and classical signatures, and positive correlation between EMT program and basal-like signatures.

Text 434
10.1038/s41598-019-57110-6
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 4. single-cell rna-seq cell-type analysis of mouse mononuclear muscle cells. (a) umap plot of fap cells isolated from quadriceps and diaphragm, colored by their expression of fbn1 (green) and lum (orange). (b) correlation plot of the gene expression for 11 top markers for each human fap cell subtype (fbn1+ and lum+) over the mouse samples. genes are arranged via hierarchical clustering with their human fap subtype marker assignment labeled by the black bars on the left of the figure. the location of fbn1 and lum are emphasized by boxes.']. Reference sentences:[]
Summary: Correlation of gene expression patterns in different cell subtypes based on top markers, emphasizing fbn1 and lum.

Text 435
10.1038/s41598-019-57110-6
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 5. fiber-type gene signatures and fiber-type specific tissue deconvolution. (a) heatmap of gene expression for twenty markers per fiber-type over eighteen fiber-type specific tissue samples. heatmap values are regularized-log transformed gene expression values. (b) correlation heatmap for twenty gene markers per fiber-type. estimated cell-type proportions (spvs) for each fiber-type delineated in black; spvs correlate with gene markers for each fiber-type. (c) box plots showing estimated proportions of type i fibers (left plot) and type iia fibers (right plot) within type i specific tissue samples (orange boxes) and type iia specific tissue samples (blue boxes).']. Reference sentences:[]
Summary: Correlation between cell-type proportions and gene markers for different fiber-types shown in heatmap and box plots.

Text 436
10.1038/s41598-019-57110-6
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 3. human mononuclear muscle cell-type clustering analysis. (a) heatmap and dendrogram of mononuclear cell types in muscle, clustered by their expression of top cell-type differentiating marker genes. (b) box plot of cell-cell pearson correlation coefficients for each cell type. higher values for a given cell type suggest greater homogeneity of gene expression between the cells of that cell type.']. Reference sentences:[]
Summary: Correlation patterns in gene expression within cell types in muscle mononuclear cells.

Text 437
10.1038/s41598-019-57110-6
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 6. fiber-type deconvolution of microarray dataset. (a) correlation heatmap of twenty marker genes for each fiber-types. estimated cell-type proportions (spvs) for each fiber-type delineated in black; spvs correlate with gene markers for each fiber-type. (b,c) correlation of estimated type i and type iia fiber-type proportions with biochemically measured slow-twitch and fast-twitch fiber-type proportions, respectively (slow-twitch: p=0.02, fast-twitch: p=0.03).']. Reference sentences:[]
Summary: Correlation patterns between cell-type proportions and marker genes for different fiber-types are shown in the figure.

Text 438
10.1016/j.cell.2019.12.013
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure s4. profiling toxoplasma differentiation at single-cell resolution, related to figure 4 (a–b) distribution of umis (a) or unique genes detected (b) across single cells from indicated samples and time points. pre-processing quality control cutoffs required a minimum of 200 and a maximum of 10,000 umis. (c) percentage of umis corresponding to ribosomal genes. pre-processing quality control cutoffs allowed a maximum of 40% rrna reads. (d) the majority of variance between cells is driven by cell-cycle and stage-specific genes. plotting the 18 principal components (pcs) determined to be statistically significant by permutation analysis. the first three pcs explain 66.4% of variance at the 72 h time point. (e) pearson correlations of cell embeddings in pcs 1–18 to cell scores for g1, s/m, or bradyzoite-specific gene signatures. (f) violin plots of expression of early bradyzoite marker genes in wild-type parasites after 24, 48 or 72 h of growth under unstressed or stressed conditions. (g) umap visualization as in figure 4e colored by expression of cst1 or other early bradyzoite markers. (h) endogenous tagging of two early bradyzoite markers shows localization to the cyst wall. cultures were fixed and stained after 72 h under alkaline stress. scale bar is 10 mm. (i) bfd1 is not stage-specific but is modestly overrepresented in bradyzoite-containing clusters. umap visualization as in figure 4e colored by expression of bfd1. (j) umap visualizations colored by expression of marker genes identified as specifically upregulated in bradyzoites during the s/m phase of the cell cycle.']. Reference sentences:[]
Summary: Correlation patterns between cell embeddings and gene signatures, with emphasis on cell cycle and stage-specific genes in single-cell transcriptomics.

Text 439
10.15252/emmm.201910606
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 6. single microglia sequencing demonstrates a strong arm response in apptg in comparison with tautg mice. a umap clustering of sorted cd11b+/cd45+ myeloid cells from mouse hippocampus. arm: activated response microglia; cam: cns-associated macrophages; cpm: cycling and proliferating microglia; hm.1: homeostatic microglia cluster 1; hm.2: homeostatic microglia cluster 2; irm: interferon-response microglia; mhc.high: high mhc-expressing microglia; mnc: monocytes; trm: transitioning microglia. b distribution of cells across the different clusters per experimental group (n = 2 mice pooled for all experimental groups, except for tautg-11m and tauwt-11m with n = 3 mice pooled). c distribution of cells per experimental group over the different clusters, expressed in percentages as stated on top of each bar. e.g., of all cells within apptg-11m, 56.7% of cells are arm, while 12.5% are hm.1 cells. d scorpius-based ranking of all cells on a pseudotime from homeostatic to activated microglia. whereas all cells within the wt groups are clustered within the homeostatic part of the pseudotime trajectory, apptg-4m and apptg-11m mice demonstrate a shift toward more activated microglia. e differential expression of arm versus hm.1 microglia for apptg and tautg mice separately. genes with a positive log(fold change; lfc) are more highly expressed in arms compared to hm.1 microglia; genes with a negative lfc are more highly expressed in hm.1 compared to arm cells. as can be seen genes that are significantly differentially expressed between arm and hm.1 cells are highly similar among apptg and tautg mice (spearman correlation r = 0.91, p = 2.2e-16). lfc > |0.2| with padj < 0.05 is considered significant. f predicted contribution of microglial expression of each of the top 18 genes to the observed bulk rna-seq expression data, based on linear regression (see materials and methods). for 16/18 genes, the microglial expression contributes significantly and 67% or more to the observed expression from the bulk rna-seq. benjamini– yekutieli-adjusted p-value (padj) < 0.001; padj < 0.01; padj < 0.05.']. Reference sentences:[nine dif- ferent clusters were obtained (see fig 6a) and after matching the expression of their marker genes with publicly available gene sets (see appendix fig s4; friedman et al 2018; mancuso et al 2019a; sala frigerio et al 2019) were termed activated response microglia (arm n = 2841 cells) cns-associated macrophages (cams n = 720) cycling and proliferating microglia (cpm n = 285 see dataset ev6 for a list of marker genes) homeostatic microglia clus- ter 1 (hm.1 n = 7111) homeostatic microglia cluster 2 (hm.2 n = 2895) interferon-response microglia (irm n = 387) high major histocompatibility complex-expressing microglia (mhc.high n = 144 see dataset ev6 for a list of marker genes) monocytes (mnc n = 100) and transitioning response microglia (trm n = 1115).when assessing the distribution of cells of each experimental group over the different clusters it becomes apparent that the ratio of hm (hm.1 and hm.2) versus arm is vastly different among the experimental groups (fig 6b and c appendix fig s5).when placing all microglial cells on a pseudotime trajectory using scorpius (fig 6d preprint: cannoodt et al 2016) it becomes clear that wt microglia stay within the homeostatic state.in tautg mice however such an extreme phenotypic shift is not observed with few arm cells reaching the final stage of activation in tautg-11m mice (fig 6d).when comparing all arm cells to all hm cells within the apptg and the tautg mice and using spearman correlation with the results from the differential expression (fig 6e) it is clear that the overall arm phenotype between apptg and tautg mice is not different (spearman correlation r = 0.91 p = 2.2e-16; see also dataset ev7) with increased expression of apoe ccl4 ccl3 clec7a and lyz2 and downregulation of homeostatic markers p2ry12 tmem119 and nav2.ª 2020 the authors embo molecular medicine e10606 | 2020 9 of 18 annerieke sierksma et al embo molecular medicine a d e f b c figure 6.using the regression coefficient r2 and the benjamini–yekutieli-adjusted p- value we conclude that the bulk rna-seq expression pattern for clu and slc2a5 cannot be explained by the expression of these genes in microglia (padj < 0.05 see fig 6f).]
Patterns related to correlation between activated response microglia (arm) and homeostatic microglia (hm) in different experimental groups were analyzed. The overall arm phenotype was highly similar between apptg and tautg mice (spearman correlation r = 0.91, p = 2.2e-16).

Text 440
10.1038/s41591-019-0733-7
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 1 | scrna-seq analysis reveals unique skin t cell transcriptome in dihs/dress. a, clinical presentation and course. ten, toxic epidermal necrolysis; psl, prednisone; ivig, intravenous immunoglobulin; csa, cyclosporine. b, unsupervised t-sne plot displaying 4,676 cells from dihs/dress skin and 13,542 skin cells from five hvs, colored by shared nearest neighbor clusters. kc, keratinocyte; sm, smooth muscle. c, expression levels (x axis) of cluster-defining genes in each cluster. violin plots show the distribution of the normalized expression levels of genes and are color-coded on the basis of cluster, as in b. d, number of degs between dihs/dress and hv cells within each cluster projected onto the t-sne map. deg: |log fold change|>0.5; adjusted p value<0.05 was derived by a wilcoxon rank-sum test. e, pathways upregulated in dihs/dress lymphoid cells (cluster 4) with representative genes in each pathway. p value was derived by a hypergeometric test. f, a volcano plot of degs that are upregulated (red) or downregulated (blue) in lymphoid cells; relevant degs identified in the pathways are labeled (supplementary table 1). dihs/dress cells, n=589; hv cells, n=1,148. p value was derived by wilcoxon rank-sum test. g, lymphocytes (cluster 4; n=1,737 cells) were aligned across datasets using canonical correlation analysis (cca) and projected onto a t-sne plot that was color-coded on the basis of origin (left). expression of selected genes were projected onto the t-sne plot (top) and are shown as violin plots (bottom). violin plots show the distribution of normalized expression levels of selected genes and dots represent individual cells.']. Reference sentences:[attempts to taper prednisone led to severe flares and progression to a toxic epidermal necrolysis-like presentation (fig 1a) for which one dose of etanercept and high-dose intravenous immunoglobu- lin was administered with no clear improvement.skin presenta- tion evolved to a diffuse psoriasis-like process ultimately resulting in generalized exfoliative dermatitis (fig 1a).after performing unsuper- vised clustering and a t-distributed stochastic neighbor (t-sne) plot analyses (fig 1b and extended data fig 1a) cluster identities were determined by the expression of established markers (fig 1c and extended data fig 1b) which revealed successful capture of major skin cell subsets.in comparing patient- and hv-derived cells we identified relative abundances of keratinocytes and immune cells in dihs/dress skin (extended data fig 1c) that reflected an inflam- matory state.this further demonstrated that the lymphocyte cluster was the primary cell type that exhibited the highest tran- scriptomic differences (extended data fig 1d).consistently with the dense infiltration of cd4+ and cd8+ t cells as determined by immunohistochemistry (extended data fig 1e) cells that expressed cd3e and cd4 or cd8a predominated within the lymphocyte cluster (extended data fig 1fg).we found enrichment of pathways regard- ing lymphocyte activation and cytokine signaling which were in part driven by the upregulation of il2rg jak3 and stat1 (fig 1ef and supplementary table 1).also upregulated were genes involved in cell proliferation such as mki67 and migration such as ccr10 (fig 1ef) whereas transcripts for potentially targetable cyto- kines were undetected.subclustering the lymphocytes resulted in the segregation of dihs/dress and hv clusters demonstrating distinct transcriptomic differences and further validated that the expression of the above genes was enriched in the dihs/dress cluster (fig 1g and extended data fig 1h).immunofluorescence microscopy in dihs/dress confirmed skin infiltration of ccr10+cd3+ t cells and the expression of jak3 (extended data fig 1ij).furthermore immunohistochemical staining detected phosphorylated stat1 in mononuclear cells (extended data fig 1k) indicating that the jak–stat signaling pathway was active in skin-infiltrating lymphocytes.none of the genes that were upregulated in nonlymphocytes including parenchymal cells was directly targetable (source data fig 1d).we first filtered the matrices to exclude low-quality cells using a standard panel of three quality criteria: (1) number of detected transcripts (number of unique molecular identifiers); (2) detected genes; and (3) percent of reads mapping to mitochondrial genes (thresholds in supplementary table 5 were chosen using analysis exemplified in supplementary fig 1 and 2).data availability source data for fig 1–4 and extended data fig 1 2 and 4 are provided with the paper.b heatmap of the top-five genes marking clusters of skin cells (x-axis; from fig 1b).d fourteen clusters in fig 1b were grouped into 7 major subsets based on cell types (dihs/dress cells n = 4676; hvs cells n = 13542).]
Patterns related to correlation in gene expression between dihs/dress and hv cells, particularly in lymphoid cells, were analyzed.

Text 441
10.1093/nargab/lqaa002
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 2. in-cluster correlation: example of hepatocytes. (a) percentage of pairs of correlated genes found in the two random samples as a function of the number of links sorted by correction for different values of magic correction. (b) percentage of pairs of correlated genes found in the two random samples as a function of the number of links sorted by correlation. (c) scatter plot of the pearson correlation (x-axis) and bayesian correlation (y-axis) for all genes, colored by the logarithm of the density. (d) histogram of the total expression of the genes found in the top 3000 links.']. Reference sentences:[in figure 2a (solid line) we observe that the agreement be- tween the two groups using both methods pearson and bayesian is poor (below 5%).in figure 2b we observed that the reproducibility for correlations within small clusters is much higher with the bayesian correlation algorithm than with pearson cor- relation.the bayesian correlation was systematically lower compared with the pearson correlation (figure 2c).the distribution of the expression of the genes in the top 3000 correlated pairs for bayesian and pearson correlations is shown in figure 2d.1 a b c d figure 2.]
Summary: Patterns of correlation between gene expressions in single cells, comparing Pearson and Bayesian methods, with higher reproducibility in small clusters.

Text 442
10.1093/nargab/lqaa002
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 3. cluster correlation. (a) percentage of pairs of correlated genes found in the two random samples as a function of the number of links sorted by correlation. (b) scatter plot of the pearson correlation (x-axis) and bayesian correlation (y-axis) for all genes, colored by the logarithm of the density. (c) histogram of the total expression of the genes found in the top 3000 links.']. Reference sentences:[the agreement between pearson correlations and bayesian correlations in- creased with the number of cells (figure 3a).in figure 3b scatter plots of the bayesian correlation (y-axis) versus the pearson correlation (x-axis) are shown.in figure 3c the distri- butions of the gene expression of the genes in the top 3000 correlated pairs for bayesian and pearson correlations are shown.1 7 a b c figure 3.]
Summary: Patterns of correlation between gene expressions in single cells, comparing Pearson and Bayesian correlations.

Text 443
10.1093/nargab/lqaa002
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 5. (a) 1000-sample, (b) 2000-sample, (c) 5000-sample and (d) 10k-sample. percentage of genes in the top correlated pairs that are in the hepatocyte marker list from panglaodb as a function of the number of links considered sorted by bayesian correlation. the correlation is computed as in a cluster correlation for each cluster independently identified with seurat.']. Reference sentences:[figure 5 shows the percentage of genes in the top correlations that are in this public database as a function of the number of links considered for the different clusters with in-cluster correlation.1 9 a b c d figure 5.]
Summary: Correlation patterns of gene expressions within clusters based on the number of links considered.

Text 444
10.1093/nargab/lqaa002
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 4. percentage of correlated pairs found in the different samples using the bayesian (red line) and the pearson (blue line) method as a function of the number of links considered sorted by correlation. (a) correlation in hepatocytes. (b) correlation in all clusters. (c) reproducibility between the hepatocytes from our samples and the hepatocytes from the mca.']. Reference sentences:[figure 4a shows an agreement between the differ- ent samples of around 50% for the top 20 000 links with the bayesian method.in figure 4b we observed that the agreement between samples is around 60% with the bayesian method when 1000 links are considered.a b c figure 4.in figure 4c we show the agreement between our hepa- tocytes and the mca hepatocytes.]
Summary: Correlation patterns between cells are analyzed using Bayesian and Pearson methods, showing agreement between samples and reproducibility with external data.

Text 445
10.1093/nargab/lqaa002
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 6. (a) 1000-sample, (b) 2000-sample, (c) 5000-sample and (d) 10k-sample. percentage of genes in the top correlated pairs in the hepatocyte marker list from panglaodb as a function of the number of genes considered in the top pairs sorted by correlation (red and green) and by p-value in the markers identified by seurat (blue).']. Reference sentences:[figure 6a shows that for a small number of genes the bayesian correla- tion algorithm selected more hepatocyte markers than seu- rat or pearson correlation.1 a b c d figure 6.]
Summary: Identification of top correlated pairs of genes in hepatocyte markers using different sample sizes and correlation algorithms.

Text 446
10.1093/nargab/lqaa002
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 1. all-cell correlation. (a) percentage of pairs of correlated genes found in the two random groups as a function of the number of links sorted by correlation include repetitions (a correlated with b and b correlated with a are both included). (b) scatter plot of the pearson correlation (x-axis) and bayesian correlation (y-axis) for all genes, colored by the logarithm of the density. (c) histogram of the total expression of the genes found in the top 3000 links.']. Reference sentences:[in figure 1b scatter plot of bayesian cor- relation and pearson correlation for all pairs of genes is shown.in figure 1c the distributions of gene expression of the top 3000 correlated pairs for bayesian and pearson correla- tions are shown.1 5 a b c figure 1.]
Summary: Patterns of correlation between gene expressions across all cells, shown by scatter plot and distribution of top correlated pairs.

Text 447
10.1038/s41586-020-1962-0
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 5 | influence of culture on metabolic stress and cell type. a, primary samples were progenitor-enriched, gfp-labelled and transplanted into organoids. after 2.5 weeks, gfp+ cells were isolated by fluorescence-activated cell sorting (facs) and processed for scrna-seq. ihc, immunohistochemistry. b, primary gfp+ cells integrate into organoids differentiated using the least directed protocol. scale bar, 50 μm. pre-transplantation cells have similar profiles and cellular subtypes as primary data. after transplantation, there is a decrease in subtype correlation (n = 7 biologically independent samples across 2 independent experiments). mean ± s.d. subtype correlation indicated on graph (p = 2.8 × 10−9, two-sided welch’s t-test). c, after transplantation, primary cells show increased expression of the stress genes pgk1 (p = 1.76 × 10−87, two-sided student’s t-test) and gorasp2 (arrow; p = 9.60 × 10−63, two-sided student’s t-test) as indicated by width of coloured domain in each respective violin plot (n = 7 samples across 2 experiments). scale bar, 50 μm. d, organoids were dissociated, gfp-labelled and injected into the cortex of p4 mice. after']. Reference sentences:[this enabled us to extend our comparisons to later stages of differentiation (extended data fig 5 6).extended data fig 5 | single-cell comparison of cell types across published datasets.]
Summary: Decrease in subtype correlation and increased stress gene expression after transplantation in single cells.

Text 448
10.1038/s41586-020-1962-0
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 3 | maturation of cortical lamina and radial glia. a, immunohistochemistry of sox2+ progenitors, hopx+ org cells, ctip2+ deep layer neurons and tbr2+ ipcs in primary and organoid samples showing laminar structure during neurogenesis. primary samples express sox2 and tbr2 in the ventricular zone and ctip2 in the cortical plate at gw13. by gw15, hopx+ orgs are born and reside in the osvz. the cortex expands markedly over the following weeks with more hopx+ org cells residing in the osvz, providing a scaffold on which neurons migrate. organoids express similar markers to gw13 samples by week five of differentiation with multiple ventricular zonelike structures. org cells arise and increase between weeks eight and ten. the radial architecture expands and dissolves over this period. by week 15, a mix of cell types is present in the organoid. organoids shown were differentiated using the ‘least directed’ differentiation protocol and staining was validated independently three times (primary: n = 4 biologically independent samples; organoid: n = 3 biologically independent samples). scale bar, 50 μm. b, pseudoage was calculated by identifying networks from a 10,000-cell subset of primary radial glia that highly correlated to age (either positively or negatively). these networks were then collapsed into a single ‘age network’. the module eigengene for this age network was then calculated on the remaining data and used for pseudoage. pseudoage is indicated by the graph line and shading represents the geometric density standard error of the regression. the primary dataset (orange) has a high pearson’s correlation and r2 value, while the organoid dataset has no correlation to the pseudoage metric.']. Reference sentences:[organoids were maintained under the same conditions except for protocol-specific medium formulations (extended data fig 2) and samples were collected for immunohistochemistry and scrna-seq after 3 5 8 10 15 and 24 weeks of differentiation to evaluate relevant cell types (extended data fig 3 4).we consolidated networks that correlated with sample age into a pseudo- age metric and then correlated pseudoage with actual age observing a strong positive correlation in primary radial glia (fig 3b extended data fig 10 supplementary table 8).extended data fig 3 | comparison of broad cell types across differentiation protocols.]
Patterns related to correlation between pseudoage and actual age in primary radial glia were analyzed. Organoids showed no correlation to pseudoage.

Text 449
10.1038/s41586-020-1962-0
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 4 | analysis of areal identity in organoid excitatory neurons. a, each of seven cortical areas was used to generate a unique area gene signature by comparing expression with the other six areas. the unique signatures were considered networks, and module eigengenes across area networks were calculated for each primary and organoid cell. the area with the highest normalized eigengene (normalized to the highest score within each area for equal comparison) was designated as the areal identity of that cell. b, cortical composition for organoids across protocols. areal identity was assigned for each cell within an organoid and the areal composition is shown for the 37 organoids in our dataset. organoid samples are listed from earliest to latest stage collected (weeks 3–24). within a time point, the organoid protocol used is ordered from least to most directed differentiation; each time point is comprised of multiple psc lines. every organoid has heterogeneous areal expression. c, the average module eigengene score for each primary (orange) and organoid (blue) cell designated (primary) or assigned (organoid) pfc or v1 identity (primary, n = 5 independent samples across 5 experiments; organoid, n = 37 organoids across 4 independent experiments). the average value for pfc was not significantly different between organoid and primary, and the v1 organoid cells had higher correlation to the v1 signature than primary cells, indicating that areal identity in the organoid strongly resembles normal development (box plots: centre line shows mean, box limits show range and whiskers show standard deviation; two-sided welch’s t-test, p = 0). d, validation of intermixing of areal identities in organoid samples differentiated using the least directed differentiation protocol. in the pfc, bcl11b and satb2 colocalize in the same cell, whereas in v1 cells they are mutually exclusive. both patterns are in close proximity in the organoid. auts2 is a rostrally expressed transcription factor whereas nr2f1 is a caudally expressed factor, but they are adjacent in the organoid. scale bar, 50 μm; representative image shown (n = 3 replicates each).']. Reference sentences:[in the primary samples there was extensive intermixing within clusters of ages and cortical areas (extended data fig 4a).we were surprised to discover that most neurons corresponded to a defined areal signature (fig 4b) despite the lack of thalamic input which is thought to refine areal iden- tity3031.article extended data fig 4 | single-cell comparison of cell types across samples.]
Patterns of areal identity in single cells, resembling normal development, with intermixing of areal signatures in organoids.

Text 450
10.1038/s41586-020-1962-0
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 2 | molecular comparisons of cell subtypes between primary and organoid samples. a, each cluster was classified by marker genes for class, state, type and subtype (primary: n = 5 individuals across independent experiments; organoids: n = 37 organoids from 4 psc lines across 4 independent experiments). heat map shows correlation between pairwise combinations of marker genes (red intensity: pearson’s correlation from −1 to 1). first histogram indicates cell subtypes in primary (orange) and organoid (blue) samples. second histogram shows quantitative correlation from the best match for each category averaged across clusters (mean + s.d.; subtype versus type, p = 0.0073; subtype versus state, p = 0.00008; subtype versus class, p = 0.003; welch’s two-sided t-test). b, marker specificity of primary and organoid cluster markers. using variancepartition, the genes defining metadata properties were evaluated for contribution to overall variance. genes contributing >25% variance by cell type were used in the venn diagram. box and whisker (mean + s.d.) depicts level of specificity at class (p = 4.4 × 10−14), state (p = 4.7 × 10−18), type (p = 1.02 × 10−20) and subtype']. Reference sentences:[organoids were maintained under the same conditions except for protocol-specific medium formulations (extended data fig 2) and samples were collected for immunohistochemistry and scrna-seq after 3 5 8 10 15 and 24 weeks of differentiation to evaluate relevant cell types (extended data fig 3 4).we performed similar differential expression analysis between upper layer neuron clusters and found that two genes required for neuronal maturation and projection pattern specification mef2c and satb22425 were substantially upregulated only in primary cells (fig 2d).c subtype correlation as calculated and shown in fig 2 broken down by protocol and pluripotent line in which bars indicate subtype correlation and error bars show s.d.d dot plots from fig 2 shown with one colour only to avoid dot overlap.]
Patterns of correlation between marker genes in cell subtypes from primary and organoid samples were analyzed, showing differences in subtype, type, and state.

Text 451
10.1038/s41598-020-58327-6
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 4. application of dronc-seq on human heart tissue. (a) cell type analysis visualized with umap. (b) distribution of marker genes identified with differential expression analysis. all genes listed have p-values<10−29. (c) pearson correlation of primary heart pseudo-bulk against bulk rna-seq from ipscs (n=18), ipsc-cardiomyocytes (n=51), and primary heart tissue (n=22)18. (d) bi-clustering on pearson correlation values of primary heart nuclei with nuclei from ipscs and ipsc-derived cardiomyocytes.']. Reference sentences:[]
Summary: Correlation patterns between primary heart nuclei and nuclei from iPSCs and iPSC-derived cardiomyocytes were analyzed.

Text 452
10.1038/s41598-020-58327-6
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 3. cell type and single-cell trajectory analysis. (a,b) clustering results visualized with umap and colored by inferred cell type for drop-seq and dronc-seq. (c,d) expression of marker genes overlaid on umap plots from a and b for drop-seq and dronc-seq. (e) pearson correlation of dronc-seq and drop-seq pseudo-bulk against bulk rna-seq from ipscs (n=18), ipsc-cardiomyocytes (n=51), and primary heart tissue (n=22)18. (f,g) distribution of cell types per time-point in drop-seq and dronc-seq, respectively. (h,i) inferred trajectories using monocle with color representing inferred cell types. a total of 3500 cells were used for the trajectory corresponding to 700 per time-point.']. Reference sentences:[]
Summary: Correlation patterns between single-cell and bulk RNA-seq data across different cell types and trajectories were analyzed.

Text 453
10.1016/j.cell.2020.01.009
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 6. knockdown of antioxidant genes impaired proliferation and redox homeostasis in human granulosa cells (a) a schematic showing the procedure for hgc isolation. (b) the positive correlation of relative ros levels (left) and apoptosis levels (right) with age in hgcs. the shadow indicates the 0.95 confidence interval around smooth. n = 59 and 43 donors for ros and apoptosis analyses, respectively.']. Reference sentences:[first we observed aging-associated increased reactive oxygen species (ros) levels and apoptosis in hgcs from healthy donors further supporting the aggravated oxidative damage in hgcs during physiological aging (figure 6b).consistent with the results in monkeys hgcs exhibited aging-associated downregulation of idh1 prdx4 and ndufb10 (figure 6c).knockdown of idh1 and ndufb10 decreased cell proliferation (figure 6d).h2o2 treatment further slowed the proliferation of idh1- ndufb10- or prdx4-knockdown cells (figure 6d).go analysis showed that the upregulated genes were enriched in terms ‘‘regulation of cell death’’ and ‘‘response to stimulus’’ upon knockdown of idh1 as well as ‘‘positive regulation of cellular senescence’’ upon knockdown of ndufb10 whereas the downregulated genes were both mainly associated with oxidore- ductase activity (figure 6i; table s5).altogether these results indicate that idh1 and ndufb10 protect gcs from aging-related oxida- tive stress in both humans and monkeys (figure 6j) and the con- clusions derived from the scrna-seq analysis of monkey ovaries are relevant to ovarian aging in humans.go analysis of degs was performed with toppgene (figure 6i).knockdown of antioxidant genes in a human granulosa cell line related to figure 6 (a) regulatory network visualizing potential key transcriptional regulators in upregulated degs in aged gcs.]
Summary: Correlation between age and ROS levels/apoptosis in granulosa cells, indicating oxidative damage during aging. Knockdown of antioxidant genes impairs proliferation and redox homeostasis.

Text 454
10.1016/j.neuron.2020.01.004
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 1. an in vivo method for unbiased screening in the mammalian cns (a) schematic of pooled screening via stereotaxic intracranial injection into the mouse dorsal striatum. (b) plot of pearson correlation values versus replicate numbers pooled per sample for libraries of increasing complexity (1k, 3.1k, 20k, and 92k). as more replicates are added per sample, correlation values increase. (c) heatmap of pearson correlation values as replicates were pooled per sample in the 92k library. (d) roc-auc analysis of increasing library coverage with 1 (blue), 5 (yellow), 20 (green), and 74 (red) samples per replicate. auc values are indicated in parentheses. (e–g) scatterplots of the log2-normalized library representation in genomic dna from wt mice versus the input shrna library after 7 months (e), 4 weeks (f), and crispr library (g) after 4 weeks of in vivo incubation. blue points indicate library elements with >1 log2 fold depletion in the wt gdna as compared to the input library. pearson correlation r = 0.87 (e), r = 0.82 (f), and r = 0.95 (g). insets represent full library coverage; dotted red line indicates region expanded in (d)–(f) for visualization of differentially recovered elements.']. Reference sentences:[thus the output of our pooled screening approach was differential representation of genome-integrated library elements upon infected cell loss as revealed by high-throughput dna sequencing (figure 1a).the magni- tude of the relative library element depletion was larger and more consistent in the shrna screens (figures 1e and 1f) than the crispr screen (figure 1g).we took the drugz normalized z score (normz) from the shrna and crispr screens and compared these scores to log2-normalized gene expression data we collected from wt mouse striatum (figures figure 1.discussion in this study we have performed the first genome-wide kd screens in vivo in the mammalian cns (figure 1).]
Patterns related to correlation between library elements and genomic DNA representations in different in vivo conditions were shown in the figure.

Text 455
10.1016/j.stem.2019.12.009
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 1. global transcriptomic time series reveals the kinetics of developing primary human alveolar epithelial type 2 cells (a) the 5 stages of human lung development and samples obtained for bulk rna sequencing. (b) principal-component analysis (pca) of gene expression across all 13 samples including primordial lung progenitors (plps) derived from pluripotent stem cells at day 15 of differentiation, primary early human fetal lung alveolar epithelium (hfl; 16–17.5 weeks gestation), late hfl alveolar epithelium (20–21 weeks gestation), and adult alveolar epithelial type 2 cells (aec2) sorted on the antibody htii-280. the loadings of highly variable genes associated with differentiation and maturation of aec2 in (c) are overlayed on the pca plot in b to indicate their weight on pc1 and pc2. arrow tips denote the correlation coefficient of the respective gene with each principal component. (c) heatmap showing unsupervised hierarchical clustering of the top 1,000 most variable genes across all samples. (d) smoothed regressions of time series samples indicating normalized gene expression values (from c) for 8 selected genes associated with differentiation of aec2, 6 genes associated with maturation of aec2 and 8 selected downregulated aec2 maturation and wnt pathway genes. see also table s1.']. Reference sentences:[we performed bulk rna sequencing (rna-seq) of distal human fetal and adult lung alveolar epithelium at 3 key developmental time points (figure 1a).hierarchical clustering of these genes identified candidate ‘‘differentiation’’ clusters which included a cluster that varied early in alveolar development (weeks 16–21) and a ‘‘maturation’’ cluster enriched preferentially in adult aec2s (figure 1c).we plotted the expression kinetics of cluster genes to select 8 markers of early distal alveolar dif- ferentiation that are expressed during fetal canalicular stages prior to full aec2 maturation (‘‘differentiation’’ gene set: sftpb sftpc sftpd cldn18 lamp3 slc34a2 il8 and napsa; figure 1d).we further identified genes downregulated in adult aec2s (mycn sox11 and the wnt target genes nkd1 nkd2 and lgr5; figure 1d).in contrast the canonical tf required for lung epithelial development nkx2-1 maintains its expression over time (figure 1d) in developing iaec2s supporting its util- ity as a marker expressed throughout the lifetime of aec2s.this prolonged time needed to differentiate human iaec2s presents a substantial problem in selecting the num- ber of developmental time points to exhaustively profile using canalicular (weeks 16-26) sacular (weeks 26-36) alveolar (weeks 36- adult) embryonic (weeks 4-5) pseudoglandular (weeks 5-16) bulk rna-seq a b c d wnt pathway maturation 1 maturation aec2 differentiation downregulated with maturation and wnt pathway slc34a2 lyz cxcl5 il-8 lgr5 nkd2 nkd1 nkx2-1 sox9 sox11 mycn slpi pgc sftpa1 sftpa2 napsa sftpd sftpb lamp3 cldn18 sftpc day 15 plp early hfl (week 16-17.5) late hfl (week 20-21) adult aec2 (htii-280+) day 15 plp early hfl late hfl adult aec2 lef1 bambi top2a unchanged proliferation pc1 (43.5% explained variance) edv aairnce) nialp c2( 30.4% ex p -20 -10 0 10 20 -20 -10 0 10 sftpb sftpc sftpd cldn18 il8 lyz sftpa1 sftpa2 pgc slpi mycn sox11 nkd1 nkd2 lgr5 crh nkx2−1 cxcl5 scl34a2 napsa lamp3 n oitar muta hti dw etalu downerg 1 n oitar muta 2 r ets ul 2 n oitar muta 2 n oitaitn ereffi ec 2d a 1000 genes x 13 samples 1 n oitaitn ereffi ec 2d a mycn sox11 nkd2 nkd1 lgr5 crh lyz sftpa2 slc34a2 il8 mmp7 pgc sftpa1 slpi cxcl5 cldn18 sftpd lamp3 sftpc sftpb napsa day 15 plp early hfl late hfl adult aec2 figure 1.we used the mature aec2 marker profiles identified in primary cells (figure 1) and we found cells with expression for these markers in late branching parts of the plot representing day 29–31 time points (figures 3e and 3h).to test whether the model indeed captures paths correspond- ing to human lung development we first compared the recon- structed cshmm map to our human in vivo expression data by projecting global gene expression from our 4 developmentally relevant time points (plp early hfl late hfl and adult aec2 figure 1) onto the cshmm map (figures 4a–4c).(f–i) normalized expression levels for selected aec2 marker genes as well as the composite set (g) of 8 aec2 differentiation markers or 6 aec2 maturation markers (h and i) from figure 1.see also figure 1 and figure s2.(c and d) alignment of bulk rna-seq data from 4 in vivo time points (figure 1) was projected onto the cshmm model paths and is shown in c. the correlation of expression values between the bulk time series data and all possible set of paths in the model was computed and is shown in table d. (e) representative confocal ﬂuorescence micrograph of epithelial sphere outgrowth from nkx2-1gfp+ progenitors sorted on day 14 and cultured until day 35 of differentiation.annotation tracks (clusters) were imported from upstream analysis with the seurat package (louvain algorithm at resolution 0.6) and gene sets for predicting the degree of maturation (6 gene set) and dif- ferentiation (8 gene set) were derived from the bulk rna-seq data analysis (see figure 1).]
Patterns related to gene expression correlation with differentiation and maturation stages of single cells.

Text 456
10.1038/s41591-019-0750-6
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 4 | developmental continuum in a mouse model of metastatic escape. a, xenograft model of metastatic escape, illustrating the three stages from which single cells were sampled. b, bli growth curves (measured ex vivo for up to 120d) for all sampled xenograft metastases, including ex vivo bli images acquired at tissue collection. c,d, force-directed layout of all metastatic tumor cells (n=8,748 cells) isolated from six mice colored by source (c) and phenograph cluster (d). clusters were grossly assigned to one of three metastatic states: quiescent, correlated with a nonproliferating stem-like state (type i-q); regenerating, correlated with proliferating stem (type i-p) and the regenerative (type ii) state; and escape, which is highly concordant with sox9high aeps (type iii) (methods). e, force-directed layout (as in c,d) of all xenograft tumor cells colored by imputed, z-normalized sox2 and sox9 expression. f, bipartite graph representing genome-wide correlations across all common, variably expressed genes (n=2,096, methods) between the 18 mouse clusters (circular nodes) and four developmental human tumor states (square nodes, annotated in fig 3c). pie charts within circular nodes represent mouse cell sources. edges link mouse clusters and human states with genome-wide pearson r>0.20 and two-sided p<0.05 testing the probability of an uncorrelated system producing a pearson r as extreme as the one computed from these datasets; edge width is proportional to the correlation magnitude (see supplementary table 2 for exact values). dotted arrows suggest temporal ordering between metastatic states, based on the three stages from which cells were isolated and profiled (according to bli signature).']. Reference sentences:[cell-type assignments were further refined within myeloid epi- thelial and stromal compartments (extended data fig 3) separately from the lymphoid compartment (extended data fig 4) to avoid biases introduced by cell-type-specific capture rates.we also isolated cancer cells from one case of incipient lung metas- tasis and from three individual lung macrometastases that evolved spontaneously (fig 4ab).clustering15 identified 18 mouse metastatic populations (fig 4cd) that showed distinct patterns of sox2 and sox9 expression (fig 4e).we then correlated the genome-wide mean expression of each mouse metastatic cluster with means of the four developmental stages observed in patient-derived tumor cells (type i-p i-q ii and iii annotated in fig 3c; methods) and visualized these correlations using a bipartite graph (fig 4f).h2087-lcc cells isolated as dtcs showed a mixture of sox2low-int expressing cells and cells negative for both sox2 and sox9 (fig 4e).conversely clusters predominantly derived from spontaneous macrometas- tases showed enrichment of sox9 were correlated with regenera- tive and proliferating stem-like states (type ii and i-p respectively) and gained striking transcriptional concordance with the aep state (type iii) (fig 4f).cell types are assigned by significant correlation with patient tumor states (pearson r > 0.20 and two-sided p < 0.05 to test for noncorrelation; as in fig 4f).edges are weighted by variables linking the two independent sets like their genome-wide correlation (figure 4f and extended data fig 10f) or number of co-occurring cells (supplementary data fig 1b).myeloid/epithelial/stromal cells (extended data fig 3) and lymphoid cells (extended data fig 4) were directly subset from the imputed count matrix described above.phenograph clustering15 was computed directly on the imputed count matrix of each subset and 39 phenotypic cell types were identified within the myeloid/epithelial/stromal compartment (parameter k = 30 extended data fig 3a) and 21 phenotypic cell types were identified within the lymphoid compartment (parameter k = 50 extended data fig 4a).hierarchical clustering of the pearson correlation between each phenograph cluster and bulk immune cell type is shown in extended data fig 3c and extended data fig 4b for the myeloid/epithelial/stromal or lymphoid subsets respectively; where each row is colored by phenograph cluster.in the lymphoid subset phenograph clusters largely correlated with distinct b cytotoxic nk nkt and t cells (extended data fig 4b).cell-type assignments within the b nk and t cells of the lymphoid compartment were likewise refined by examining the median imputed expression of canonical marker genes on a per cluster basis (extended data fig 4c).final lymphoid cell-type assignments are shown in extended data fig 4d which were further confirmed by evaluation of canonical cell type markers (extended data fig 4ef).again these cell-type assignments (extended data fig 4d) were mapped back to the complete patient dataset in fig 1c using the same color scheme.this yielded a total of 8748 tumor cells with a median library size of 3423 transcripts per cell from spontaneous metastatic derivatives sequenced after one passage of in vitro antibiotic selection (essential to isolate putative dtcs fig 4 data) and 6073 tumor cells with a median library size of 3399 transcripts per cell sequenced immediately upon dissociation from nk cell-depleted metastases (fig 6 data).for both datasets 18 clusters were identified using k = 70 (fig 4d and extended data fig 10d).when visualizing the mapping between spontaneous metastases and developmental states observed in patient tumors the circular nodes representing mouse phenograph clusters are shown as pie charts representing the fraction of cells per mouse sourced from dtcs incipient and macrometastases (fig 4f).shading is used to highlight nodes assigned the three metastatic states detailed in fig 4.]
Patterns related to correlation between mouse metastatic clusters and human tumor states were visualized using a bipartite graph.

Text 457
10.1038/s41591-019-0750-6
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 6 | nk cell-dependent pruning limits the phenotypic expansion of metastasis-initiating cells. a, in vivo nk cell perturbation assay in mice harboring latent metastasis-initiating cells. b, two-dimensional cell density plot of z-normalized sox2 and sox9 imputed expression in h2087-lcc cells isolated from macrometastases ± nk cell depletion, as determined by scrna-seq. c, fraction of type i/ii and type iii cells detected in spontaneous versus nk celldepleted macrometastases (three spontaneous macrometastases collected from n=3 independent mice and eight nk cell-depleted macrometastases collected from n=5 independent mice; center line, geometric mean; whiskers, geometric s.d.; points, all measured data; two-sided mann–whitney u-test). cell types are assigned by significant correlation with patient tumor states (pearson r>0.20 and two-sided p<0.05 to test for noncorrelation; as in fig. 4f). d, top degs for nk cell-depleted cluster with highest sox2 expression (phenograph cluster 8, n=322 cells, see extended data fig 10e) compared to all other cells, computed using mast43. degs are colored red with diameters proportional to −log10(padj) for genes with fold change >1.5 and padj<0.05. e, sox2 and sox9 if in a representative spontaneous and nk cell-depleted macrometastasis (n=15 macrometastases evaluated, nuclear sox9 expression summarized in f). scale bars, 50µm. f, nuclear sox2 and sox9 single-positive, double-positive and negative cell fractions quantified per macrometastatic lesion (n=11,376 single cells quantified, fraction of metastases reported across n=15 lesions including lung, bone, kidney and soft connective tissues collected from seven mice). five representative 20× frames were evaluated per lesion. sox9 single-positive cells were enriched in spontaneous as compared to nk cell-depleted macrometastases (n=15 independent macrometastases, p=0.06, one-sided mann–whitney u-test); abundance of other cell types was not significantly altered (data not shown). center line, geometric mean; whiskers, geometric s.d.; points, all measured data.']. Reference sentences:[within the adult normal lung epi- thelium we identified four mature cell types including alveolar epi- thelial cell types 1 and 2 (aec1 and aec2) of the distal lung as well as ciliated and club cells of the upper airway (extended data fig 6ab).lineage-specific gene sets defined in the developing mouse embryo at d18.523–25 (supplementary table 1) distinguished these four epithelial cell types which showed near-mutual exclusivity in their top differentially expressed genes (degs) (extended data fig 6cd).canonical markers of the lung epithelium were among the top degs (extended data fig 6c) and the majority of cells within the aec1 aec2 and ciliated clusters highly expressed more than 60% of genes within each lineage-specific gene signature (extended data fig 6e).thirty days later we administrated anti-gm1 antibody to trigger nk cell depletion (fig 6a) which facilitates the robust outbreak of macrometasta- ses as evidenced by bli signal (extended data fig 10a) and his- tological analysis1641.despite their monoclonal origin analysis of nk cell-depleted macrometastases by scrna-seq showed that sox2+ and double- negative cell types escape more often than in spontaneously arising metastases (fig 6b).each nk cell-depleted metastasis was rich in type i and ii cells whose growth was otherwise restricted in metastases spontaneously arising in the presence of surveilling nk cells (fig 6c).concordantly this cluster downregulated e-cadherin (cdh1) (fig 6d) and showed reduced expression of multiple mhc class i molecules which would render this subpopulation susceptible to killing by nk cells (fig 6d).sox9high cells were enriched only in spontaneous macrome- tastases that evolve in the presence of nk cells compared to metas- tases arising after nk depletion (fig 6ef).force-directed graphs52 were alternatively used to visualize epithelial and tumor subsets which better represent cell state transitions and local relationships between cancer cells and normal epithelial subpopulations while maintaining a coherent global structure (fig 2 and 4 extended data fig 6–8 and 10).our analysis of the epithelial compartment focused on the relationship between primary tumor cells and epithelial lineages of the postnatal lung; therefore we evaluated cell states within three epithelial subsets in a step-wise fashion: (e1) the normal adult human lung (extended data fig 6); (e2) the merged normal lung and primary tumor (fig 2 and extended data fig 7); and (e3) the merged normal lung primary tumor and metastases (fig 3 and extended data fig 8).phenograph cluster assignments were stable for higher values of k as determined by the ari described above and four clusters were identified in the normal lung which are annotated by cell type in extended data fig 6ab.canonical lineage-specific genes25 (supplementary table 1) are labeled on the x axis of this clustered heat map (extended data fig 6c) and rows of the clustered heat map are colored by lineage assignment.for visualization gsea pathways distinguished by abs(nes) > 2.5 and padj < 0.05 were clustered according to the euclidean distance metric (extended data fig 6d) and show specific distal (aec1 and aec2) and proximal (club and ciliated) epithelial lineages; white areas of the heat map indicate pathways that did not meet this criterion.cell- type annotations were orthogonally validated by evaluating the fraction of cells per phenograph cluster that abundantly express (at or above the 75th percentile of the population expression level) a given number of genes per lineage-specific signature25 (extended data fig 6e and supplementary table 1); more than 60% of a lineage-specific genes were abundantly expressed by aec1 aec2 and ciliated cell types.club cells failed this specific test despite showing significant enrichment of two club cell signatures independently derived in the developing mouse embryo at d18.5 (lunggens2324 nes = 2.64 padj = 0.01 and treutlein et al.25 nes = 2.56 padj = 0.02; extended data fig 6d).this yielded a total of 8748 tumor cells with a median library size of 3423 transcripts per cell from spontaneous metastatic derivatives sequenced after one passage of in vitro antibiotic selection (essential to isolate putative dtcs fig 4 data) and 6073 tumor cells with a median library size of 3399 transcripts per cell sequenced immediately upon dissociation from nk cell-depleted metastases (fig 6 data).the same criteria were applied to assign mouse metastatic clusters to patient developmental states when reporting the fraction of cells assigned to each developmental stage per spontaneous and nk cell- depleted mouse macrometastases (fig 6c).]
Summary: Correlation patterns between cell types in metastases with and without NK cells, affecting Sox2 and Sox9 expression.

Text 458
10.1038/s41590-020-0595-7
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 6 | niche-dependent changes in hsc chromatin accessibility and transcriptome. a, density map shows chromatin accessibility in hscs sorted from ebf1fl/flprx1cre and control animals. atac signals merged from duplicates are centered ±3 kb around the center of the peak. the heat map density is represented as the rpkm mean score. b, digital genomic footprinting analysis shows average normalized tn5 insertion profiles around footprinted motifs in merged atac peaks. insertions on the forward and reverse strands are indicated in red and blue, respectively. c, volcano plot displaying differentially expressed genes (>twofold, p<0.05) in hscs sorted from ebf1fl/flprx1cre and control mice (n=2 biologically independent samples per group). upregulated genes are colored in red and downregulated genes are colored in green; fc, fold change. the differential gene expression between the conditions was calculated using cuffdiff. the differentially expressed genes were filtered with the q value cutoff of <0.05 following benjamini–hochberg multiple testing correction of the original p values. d, representative tracks show the merged atac signal correlation with upregulated gene (dpp4) and downregulated gene (rps6ka6). the scale on the y axis represents rpkm values in atac-seq and rna-seq tracks. e density plot shows sites with reduced chromatin accessibility retained between hscs from original donor mice and primary and secondary recipients. atac signals merged from the replicates of each experiment are centered ±3 kb around the center of the peak. the heat map density is represented as the rpkm mean score. f, representative tracks show the merged atac signal corresponding to the density maps shown in e. the scale on the y axis represents rpkm values. g, crispr–cas9-mediated deletion of dna sequences with reduced atac signal identified in e and f. graph represents relative mrna expression levels of depicted genes in sorted gfp+ lsk cells, 24h after electroporation with plasmid containing grna targeting dna sequences within or in proximity of the fancc, fanci, kdm6b and gas6 genes (crispr) or with a control plasmid (ctr). data are represented as the mean fc ± s.e.m. over empty control plasmid (ctr) set as 1, for n=4 independent experiments (p=0.04 for fancc and gas6, p=0.033 for kdm6b).']. Reference sentences:[the overall chimerism and donor contribution to the hscs b cells and t cells in the bm and peripheral blood of pri- mary recipients was similar for hscs from ebf1fl/flprx1cre and con- trol mice (fig 5ef and extended data fig 6a–d).nevertheless donor contribution into myeloid cells was decreased in the bm (fig 5f) and peripheral blood at weeks 8 and 16 after transplan- tation compared to control mice (extended data fig 6b).the phenotype became progressively more severe in the secondary transplantations for which we observed a multi-lineage engraft- ment defect with decreased chimerism in the bm and peripheral blood (fig 5g and extended data fig 6a) and reduced donor contribution to hscs and mature blood cells compared to control mice (fig 5h and extended data fig 6b–d).in the hscs from the ebf1-deficient niche we identified 2382 sites with diminished accessibility and 2433 sites with enhanced accessibility (fig 6a and extended data fig 7a).motif discovery and digital genomic footprinting analysis identi- fied motifs for ets ap-1 runx and irf transcription factors in lost or diminished atac peaks (fig 6b and extended data fig 7b).we identified 78 upregulated and 59 downregulated genes in hscs from ebf1fl/flprx1cre mice compared to the hscs from control mice (fig 6c and supplementary table 4).integration of the atac and rna-seq data sets revealed a correlation of lost atac-seq peaks with dysregulated genes (fig 6d).we identified 69 sites with reduced chromatin accessibility that were retained in primary and secondary recipients (fig 6e and supplementary table 4).sites with a persis- tent decrease in the atac-sensitive signal were found to be in the proximity of genes that are involved in the dna damage response (fancc) chromosome segregation (ubash3b) transcriptional reg- ulation (lhx9) and cell migration and adhesion (arpc2) (fig 6f extended data fig 7e and supplementary table 4).the deletion of sequences associated with differential atac peaks in the fancc and gas6 loci decreased the expression of these genes whereas the deletion of such a sequence in kdm6b resulted in its increased expression (fig 6g).e representative tracks showing differential merged atac signal in hscs from ebf1+/+prx1cre and ebf1fl/flprx1cre mice correlated with genes differentially expressed between cluster 2 and 3 (fig 6e).]
Patterns related to correlation between chromatin accessibility and gene expression changes in single cells.

Text 459
10.1038/s41590-020-0595-7
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 7 | niche-dependent changes in hsc composition. a, t-sne map shows clusters of cells with similar transcriptomes within the hsc (cd135–cd48– cd150+lsk) population, derived by the raceid3 algorithm. data represent 1,333 single-sorted cells from 2 independent experiments (n=5 mice for the ebf1+/+prx1cre group and n=6 mice for the ebf1fl/flprx1cre group). b, t-sne map shows the distribution of hscs from ebf1+/+prx1cre mice (gray) and hscs from ebf1fl/fl prx1cre mice (blue) within established clusters. c, t-sne map shows clusters with statistically significant enrichment of hscs from wild-type niche (cluster 3) or hscs from ebf1-deficient niche (cluster 2). d, number of cells analyzed in each cluster that correspond to a and that are derived from a fisher’s exact test. p<0.01 (exact p values and cell numbers for each cluster are provided in supplementary table 5). p<0.01. e, heat map shows genes that are differentially expressed between cluster 2 and cluster 3. the scale represents the log2-transformed normalized expression of genes (rows) across the cells in each cluster (columns). the color code of clusters corresponds to that used in c. f, t-sne maps highlight the normalized expression of quiescence markers, such as malat1, procr, hlf and neat1 in sequenced hscs. g, representative tracks show the differential merged atac signal, highlighted by boxes, in hscs from ebf1+/+prx1cre and ebf1fl/flprx1cre mice, correlated with genes that are differentially expressed between cluster 2 and cluster 3 (e). a region on chromosome 8 with pcm1 and asah1 serves as a control without differential atac signal. the scale on the y axis represents rpkm. black boxes and vertical lines below the tracks indicate exons.']. Reference sentences:[in the hscs from the ebf1-deficient niche we identified 2382 sites with diminished accessibility and 2433 sites with enhanced accessibility (fig 6a and extended data fig 7a).motif discovery and digital genomic footprinting analysis identi- fied motifs for ets ap-1 runx and irf transcription factors in lost or diminished atac peaks (fig 6b and extended data fig 7b).we also compared motif co-occurrence clustering for the wild-type-specific versus knock- out-specific digital footprints and found a co-occupancy of ets and ap-1 motifs (extended data fig 7c).in addition a gene set enrichment analysis showed that genes that are involved in the positive regulation of the differentiation signa- ture of myeloid cells are enriched in hscs derived from the wild- type niche (extended data fig 7d).sites with a persis- tent decrease in the atac-sensitive signal were found to be in the proximity of genes that are involved in the dna damage response (fancc) chromosome segregation (ubash3b) transcriptional reg- ulation (lhx9) and cell migration and adhesion (arpc2) (fig 6f extended data fig 7e and supplementary table 4).the clustering using raceid3 algorithm revealed 6 major clusters in the hsc (cd135–cd48– cd150+) population (fig 7a).interestingly cluster 2 contained significantly more and cluster 3 significantly fewer cells from ebf1fl/flprx1cre mice compared to controls (fig 7b–d and supple- mentary table 5).in cluster 3 we observed an enrichment of mark- ers that characterize quiescent hscs (fig 7ef extended data fig 8a and supplementary table 5).notably a substantial number of genes that were dif- ferentially regulated between cluster 2 and cluster 3 also showed reduced chromatin accessibility in hscs from ebf1fl/flprx1cre mice compared to controls (fig 7g and extended data fig 8b).b representative tracks showing differential merged atac signal in hscs from ebf1+/+prx1cre and ebf1fl/flprx1cre mice correlated with genes differentially expressed between cluster 2 and 3 (fig 7e).]
Patterns related to correlation between gene expression and chromatin accessibility in hscs from different niches.

Text 460
10.1038/s41590-020-0602-z
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 3 | dissemination of helper t cells in the colon and region-determined transcriptional profiles. a, correlation matrix of mean transcriptional profiles of th1 and th17 cells from the cecum, transverse colon, sigmoid colon and mlns (n=5 donors). b, mean expression level of differentially expressed genes of pooled th1 and th17 cells between the cecum, transverse colon and sigmoid colon as in a. point size shows the fraction of cells with non-zero expression. c, umap projection of smart-seq2-profiled flow-sorted t cells annotated as th1 and th17 cells of the cecum, transverse colon and sigmoid colon (n=1 donor). the colored lines connect cells sharing the same cdr3 sequence. d, heatmap of the number of members within clonal families in the th1 and th17 subsets (left) and colon region (right) as in c.']. Reference sentences:[these were annotated based on the expression of functional markers (il17a il22 and ccl20 versus ifng and cxcr3) (supplementary fig 3a) rather than transcrip- tional regulators (rorc and tbx21) that are lowly expressed.correlation analysis of th1 and th17 cells between different colon tissues revealed high transcriptional similarity between these effec- tor cell subtypes (fig 3a) with mln versus peripheral tissue signa- tures accounting for the greatest amount of variability (spearman’s ρ = 0.88).differential gene expression analysis between the effector cells in the sigmoid colon versus those in cecum and transverse colon revealed higher expression of activation-related molecules including tank (traf family member associated nfkb activator; adjusted p < 10−10) cd83 (adjusted p < 10−10) and pim3 (adjusted p < 10−8) (fig 3b).expression of ccl20 which encodes the ligand for ccr6 that is expressed by epithelial and myeloid cells more highly in the small intestine than the colon18 was also slightly increased by helper t cells of the proximal colon (fig 3b) although this is probably due to higher abundance of ccl20+ th17 cells at this site (fig 2c and supplementary fig 3a).conversely sigmoid colon effector t cells showed higher expression of klf2 (adjusted p < 10−14; fig 3b) which encodes a transcriptional factor that trans- activates the promoter for sphingosine 1-phosphate receptor 1 and is critical for t cell recirculation through peripheral lymphoid tissue19 lmna (adjusted p < 10−47) which encodes a molecule that is reported to promote th1 differentiation20 and eef1g (adjusted p < 10−13) which encodes a driver of protein synthesis.clonal groups were shared between the th1 and th17 subtypes supporting the notion that the effector fate of cd4+ t cells is determined after their initial activation21 (fig 3cd).additionally clonal expansion was observed in the th1 cells of the sigmoid colon (fig 3d) in line with greater abundance in this tissue.likewise clonal expansion of th17 cells was greatest in the cecum matching the accumulation seen with the droplet-based scrna-seq analysis (fig 3d).]
Correlation patterns between effector T cell subtypes in different colon regions, with higher activation-related gene expression in sigmoid colon.

Text 461
10.1038/s41591-020-0752-4
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 3 | analysis of the ms1 cell state as a sepsis marker. a, receiver operating characteristic (roc) curve for subject classification based on ms1 abundance (top) or mean plac8 and clu expression in ms1 cells (bottom), and gene-expression-score-based classifiers (faim3/plac8, septicyte lab). ms1 is taken as the fraction of total cd45+cells per subject, as defined by scrna-seq. gene-set scores were calculated, as detailed in each corresponding publication, on the pseudo-bulk gene-expression matrix obtained by summing read counts from all cells of each subject. sep indicates all subjects with sepsis analyzed in this study (int-uro, uro, bac-sep, icu-sep). b,c, forest plots showing the effect size (log2(standardized mean difference between indicated patient phenotypes)) of inferred ms1 abundance in each dataset from bulk-gene-expression deconvolution. accession numbers of the data from each study are listed on the left. boxes indicate the effect size in an individual study, with whiskers extending to the 95% confidence interval. size of the box is proportional to the relative sample size of the study. diamonds represent the summary effect size among the subject groups, determined by integrating the standardized mean differences across all studies. the width of the diamond corresponds to its 95% confidence interval. d, individual roc curves for sepsis versus uninfected healthy controls; analysis includes each study in b for which the number of sepsis subjects and controls were both greater than 5 (n=751 total subjects from 9 cohorts). e, roc curves for classifying sepsis versus sterile inflammation (n=696 total subjects from 7 cohorts) on the basis of the mean expression of plac8, clu and the top 6 ms1 marker genes (retn, cd63, alox5ap, sec61g, txn and mt1x). black curves in d and e indicate the summary rocs. f, flow cytometry density plots of lin–cd14+ monocytes (where lin– cells are those negative for the indicated lineage markers) gated on surface expression of il1r2 and hla-dr. percentage of the population over total cd14+ monocytes in each quadrant is indicated. each density plot shows pbmcs from a single subject analyzed in one experiment. g, fractional abundance of cd14+hla-drloil1r2hi monocytes by flow cytometry in control, leuk-uti, int-uro and uro subjects (n=6, 4 and 6, respectively). samples used for this analysis were from the primary cohort (control, leuk-uti, int-uro, uro). boxes show the median and iqr for each patient cohort, with whiskers extending to 1.5× the iqr in either direction from the top or bottom quartile. h, correlation of ms1 fractions defined by scrna-seq (y axis) and cd14+hla-drloil1r2hi monocyte fractions of cd45+ cells (x axis) from n=4 leuk-uti and n=6 uro subjects from g. significance of the correlation (pearson r) was calculated with a two-sided permutation test. i, scrnaseq of sorted cd14+hla-drloil1r2hi, monocytes and original ms1 cells visualized with t-sne projection. top scatterplot (n=15,021 cells) shows original classification of cells from the cohorts, and the bottom shows scaled embedding density of sorted cells (n=7,098 cells) in the same projection.']. Reference sentences:[upon extending this approach to bulk transcriptional data from 11 sepsis cohorts included in a recent meta-analysis4 we found the inferred abun- dance of the ms1 state to be higher in people with sepsis than in controls in each study with a summary effect size of 1.9 across all cohorts (fdr = 1.75 × 10–30 fig 3b and supplementary table 4).furthermore the inferred ms1 fraction alone for each subject can be used as a classifier for sepsis in the same datasets with a sum- mary auc of 0.90 (range of 0.81–0.98) across all studies (fig 3d) performing similarly to reported classifiers that were derived from bulk gene-expression signatures9 (extended data fig 9e).in a similar analysis of 7 datasets comparing people with sepsis with icu controls (people with non-infectious systemic inflammatory response syndrome)9 (fig 3c) ms1 is expanded in sepsis albeit with a lower but notable effect size of 0.32 (fdr = 0.08) consistent with observations in our own cohorts.whereas the ms1 fraction alone cannot be used as a sepsis classifier in this context analyzing the co- expression of plac8 clu and ms1 marker genes (retn cd63 alox5ap sec61g txn and mt1x) in these datasets performs well in classifying subjects with sepsis against sterile inflammation (fig 3e) with a summary auc of 0.81 (range of 0.63–1.00) per- forming similarly to published signatures (extended data fig 9df).among the differentially expressed genes that dis- tinguish it from other cd14+ monocytes low hla-dr and high il1r2 expression can be used to quantify the fraction of ms1 cells (fig 3f).by contrast hla-drloil1r2hicd14+ monocytes were at higher frequencies in int-uro and uro subjects than in control or leuk-uti subjects (fig 3g) and their fractions measured by flow cytometry correlated significantly with fractions determined by scrna-seq (pearson r = 0.87) (fig 3h).cells sorted with this phenotype (7098 cells from 5 uro subjects) co-localize by expression profile with ms1 cells in our original dataset when analyzed together and projected on the same t-distributed stochas- tic neighbor embedding (t-sne) plot (fig 3i).gating strategy gating strategies are described in supplementary figure 3 figure 3f and figure 4a.]
Patterns related to correlation between ms1 state and specific marker genes, as well as correlation between ms1 fractions and monocyte fractions, were observed in single-cell transcriptomics data.

Text 462
10.1038/s41591-020-0752-4
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 2 | scrna-seq identifies sepsis-specific immune-cell states and gene signatures. a, t-sne plots for each cell type (n=32,341, 7,970, 9,390, 58,557 and 14,299 cells for t, b, nk, monocyte (mono) and dendritic (dc) cells, respectively), colored by embedding density of cells from subjects with sepsis (int-uro, uro, bac-sep and icu-sep; left) and cell state (right). b, select marker genes that are differentially expressed (false-discovery rate (fdr)<0.05, two-tailed wilcoxon rank-sum test) in each cell state, when compared with other cell states within the same cell type. color scale corresponds to z-scored, log-transformed mean gene-expression counts for each cell state. ts, t cell states; bs, b cell states; ns, nk cell states; ms, monocyte states; ds, dendritic cell states; mk, megakaryocytes. c, fraction of total cd45+cells across each subject type for total monocytes (left) and ms1 cells (right). in the control group, points for healthy controls that were follow-up samples from enrolled leuk-uti, int-uro and uro subjects are indicated as black symbols, and those for matched healthy control samples from an outside source are indicated as aqua symbols. fdr values are shown when comparing each disease state with healthy controls (two-tailed wilcoxon rank-sum test, corrected for testing of multiple states). boxes show the median and iqr for each patient cohort, with whiskers extending to 1.5× the iqr in either direction from the top or bottom quartile. sample size (n) for each cohort is indicated in fig 1b. d, volcano plot showing results from differential expression analysis (two-sided wilcoxon rank-sum test) between ms1 cells from icu-sep and ms1 cells from icu-nosep subjects. genes with log2(fc) >1 are highlighted in red, and the top five genes with the highest positive fold changes are labeled. n=2,153 and 1,442 cells from the 8 icu-sep and 7 icu-nosep subjects, respectively. e, box and swarm plots showing the mean expression (log2(unique molecular identifier (umi) counts) of plac8 and clu in ms1 cells for each subject from the icu-sep and icu-nosep cohorts. boxes show the median and iqr for each patient cohort, with whiskers extending to 1.5× the iqr in either direction from the top or bottom quartile. f,g, scatterplots showing correlation between mean gene-module usage in ms1 cells and sequential organ-failure assessment (sofa) scores for int-uro and uro subjects. line and shadow indicate linear regression fit and 95% confidence interval, respectively. significance of the correlations (pearson r) were calculated with a two-sided permutation test, corrected for testing of multiple modules.']. Reference sentences:[we identified immune-cell states by clustering the cells in two steps: low-resolution clustering to identify the major immune-cell types (fig 1f and extended data fig 2ab and 3) then subclustering each major cell type separately in a robust manner (extended data fig 2c-d and methods).we found four distinct monocyte groups: ms1 cd14+ cells characterized by high expression of resistin (retn) arachidonate 5-lipoxygenase activat- ing protein (alox5ap) and interleukin-1 receptor type 2 (il1r2) (fig 2b); ms2 characterized by high expression of class ii major histocompatibility complex (mhc); ms3 similar to non-classical cd16hi monocytes; and ms4 which is composed of the remaining cd14+ cells that express low levels of both class ii mhc and inflam- matory cytokines.whereas the fractions of classical cell types vary substantially among the control leuk-uti and sepsis (int-uro uro bac-sep and icu-sep) cohorts we found more pronounced differences in the relative abundances of particular cell states derived from our clustering most notably in ms1 (fig 2c).thus we identified genes differentially expressed in ms1 cells from icu-sep versus icu-nosep subjects (fig 2d) and found two genes placenta-associated 8 (plac8) and clusterin (clu) that distinguish these two populations of subjects (fig 2e and extended data fig 7c).of note the module in ms1 cells corresponding to mitochondrial respiration (ms1-a; mt-nd4 mt-co3 mt-atp6) correlated significantly with dis- ease severity in subjects with sepsis from our primary cohort (int- uro and uro fdr = 0.03; fig 2f) supporting the link between alterations in energy metabolism and immunoparalysis in sepsis23.in addition a module of genes in ms1 related to anti-inflammatory and pro-resolving responses (ms1-b; s100a8 retn alox5ap fpr2)24–26 correlates negatively with severity (fdr = 0.04) (fig 2g and extended data fig 7g) consistent with a current model of sep- sis wherein people early in their disease course have a heightened inflammatory state but subsequently switch to an immunosup- pressive state27.]
Patterns related to correlation between gene-module usage in ms1 cells and disease severity scores were identified in sepsis patients.

Text 463
10.1038/s41598-020-59808-4
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 3. revigo plots show gene ontology (go) terms enriched in (a) positively or (b) negatively associated dwv-associated gene lists. plots are organized in semantic space in which more similar terms in the go hierarchy are more closely positioned. circle diameter is correlated with the inverse of the go term’s specificity with smaller circles representing more specific terms.']. Reference sentences:[]
Summary: Visualization of gene ontology terms correlation in semantic space based on specificity, with smaller circles representing more specific terms.

Text 464
10.1038/s41598-020-59827-1
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 3. cell-type cluster based differential gene expression, gene-gene correlation, and biological pathways influenced by delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol(thc). (a) heatmap showing three subtypes of cd4+ t-cells affected by thc. color bar represents log2 fold change between post-thc and pre-thc samples. each row represents significant genes for top 20 genes in each cell cluster. cluster 8 shows a distinct pattern of differential gene expression from those observed in clusters 3 and 6. (b) kegg-based gene network in cd4+ t-cells. genes with nominal p<0.001 from linear mixed regression model are selected to construct a gene network. gene-gene links were derived from kegg: kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes – genomenet. significance is set at false discovery rate (fdr)<0.05. two hub genes, ccr7 and hla-a, are differentially expressed genes influenced by thc. (c) heatmap showing three subgroups of cd8+ t-cells affected by thc. (d) kegg-based gene network in cd8+ t-cells. genes with nominal p<0.001 in cd8+ t-cells are selected to construct a kegg-based gene network. in cd8+ t-cells, we observed 35 nodes and 31 edges. one hub gene, hla-a, is differentially expressed by thc. (e) heatmap showing two subtypes of b cells affected by thc. each row represents significant differentially expressed genes in b cells. cluster 12 shows a distinct differential gene expression pattern from that of cluster 14. (f) kegg-based gene network in b cells. genes with nominal p<0.001 in b cells are selected to construct a gene network based on gene-gene relationship in kegg. a total of 34 nodes and 28 edges were constructed. three hub genes, hla-a, hla-dqa1, and hla-dpa1 were identified. (g) kegg-based gene network in natural killer (nk) cells. we observed 17 nodes and 12 edges. one hub gene, ccl4, was significantly differentially expressed following thc infusion. (h) heatmap showing two distinct subtypes of cd14+ monocytes (cluster 10 and cluster 17) affected by thc. color bar represents log2 fold change between pre-thc and post-thc samples. each row represents significant genes in cd14+']. Reference sentences:[]
Summary: Correlation patterns between gene expressions in different cell types influenced by THC are shown, with distinct differential gene expression and hub genes identified.

Text 465
10.1038/s41598-020-59827-1
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 5. thc receptor gene expression and co-expression network in b cells. (a) t-sne plot showing thc receptor gene expression in distinct cell types of peripheral blood mononuclear cells. small amount of cnr1 expression is observed in any of the cell types. cnr2 is highly expressed in b cells, followed by nature killer cells, cd8+ t-cells, and minimally expressed in cd4+ t-cells. gpr55 is highly expressed in cd4+ t-cells more than other cell types. gpr18 is widely expressed in peripheral blood mononuclear cells. (b) cnr2 expression is significantly correlated with 74 genes in b cells. the genes co-expressed with cnr2 are involved in functions of biological regulation, cellular process, immune system process, metabolic process, and signal functions.']. Reference sentences:[]
Summary: Correlation patterns between cnr2 gene expression and 74 co-expressed genes in b cells related to various cellular functions.

Text 466
10.1371/journal.ppat.1008334
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 3. pf4+-macrophages are the major resource to generate second wave of pro-inflammatory factors at late stage of iav-driven pneumonia. (a) heatmaps showing the normalized expression (z-score) of the pro-inflammatory genes in the various cells of clusters with high ratios at day 7 p.i.. (b) the normalized expression (umi counts) of some significant genes with high expression in different clusters at day 7 p.i.. (c) pf4+ cells in the lung after iav infection. the tdtomato-pf4 mice were uninfected or infected with 0.5 ld50 of influenza a/pr/ 8/34 (h1n1) viruses. at day 7 p.i, the tdtomato-pf4+ cells in the lung were scanned. the nucleus was stained with dapi (blue) and tomatopf4 (red) was shown in red. scale bars, 500 μm. (d) at day 0 and day 7 p.i., the tdtomato-pf4+ cells in the lung were calculated. at least 300 cells in each group from three independent assays were scored. data are shown as the means ± sd. ==, p < 0.01 (student t test, n = 3). (e) the expression of ccl2 in pf4+ cells. the tdtomato-pf4 mice were infected with 0.5 ld50 of influenza a/pr/8/34 (h1n1) viruses. at day 7 p.i, the tdtomato-pf4+ cells in the lung were stained with anti-ccl2 antibodies (green). the nucleus was stained with dapi (blue) and pf4-tdtomato (red) was shown in red. scale bars, left, 200 μm; right, 50 μm. (f) heatmap showing the scaled distances calculated based on pearson correlations for relationships between the z-score normalized mean expression profiles in all the indicated cells. (g) pca plot showing the relationships among the indicated cell clusters and the megakarycytes from lung and bone mellow described by others (srp097794, ncbi).']. Reference sentences:[although c6-active t-cells expressed some pro-inflammatory factors such as ccl5 most pro-inflammatory factors such as ccl7 ccl8 cxcl2 ccl2 ccl9 ccl12 cxcl10 (fig 3a and s16–s18 figs) tnf-α and complement family member c1q were mainly expressed in cells from c8 cells which were characteristically pf4-positive (fig 3a and 3b).in the lungs of mice infected with iav (fig 3c and 3d).we confirmed that the pro-inflammatory factors ccl2 and ccl8 were expressed in these pf4+ cells in the lung at day 7 p.i using an immunohistochemistry assay (fig 3e and s21 fig).we found that the c8 was much closer to c5/c1/c17-macrophage-lineage in the pearson cor- relation analysis (fig 3f) and pca analyses on the z-score normalized mean expression pro- files of these cell clusters (fig 3g).]
Patterns related to correlation between pro-inflammatory gene expressions in different cell clusters, particularly pf4+ cells, at day 7 post-infection with influenza A virus.

Text 467
10.1371/journal.ppat.1008334
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figs). the pf4+ cells were significantly increased at day 7 p.i. in the lungs of mice infected with iav (fig 3c and 3d). we confirmed that the pro-inflammatory factors ccl2 and ccl8 were expressed in these pf4+ cells in the lung at day 7 p.i using an immunohistochemistry assay (fig 3e and s21 fig). as pf4-positive megakaryocytes were recently identified in lung [29, 30], we compared the transcriptional profile of c8 with that of c5, c1, and c17, which were closed to c8 in tsne maps, as well as that of megakaryocytes identified in lung and bone marrow [29]. we found that the c8 was much closer to c5/c1/c17-macrophage-lineage in the pearson correlation analysis (fig 3f) and pca analyses on the z-score normalized mean expression profiles of these cell clusters (fig 3g). we therefore proposed that these c8 pf4-postive cells were macrophage-lineage rather than megakaryocyte-lineage. accordingly, we found that a group of pf4+-macrophages was the major contributor to the second wave of pro-inflammatory factors at day 7 p.i.. to further decipher the function of c8-pf4-positive macrophages in the lung after iav infection, we utilized a pf4-cre induced dtr line (pf4-cre; idtr) in our study [31]. pf4+cd41+-macrophages cells are depleted in the presence of diphtheria toxin (dt). the pf4-cre; idtr mice were intraperitoneally injected daily with dt 4 days after inoculation with 0.5 ld50 of a/pr/8/34 (h1n1) viruses (fig 4a). of note, the pf4-cre+; idtr mice and pf4-cre-; idtr mice were injected with dt after infected with a/pr/8/34 (h1n1) viruses. the cell numbers of neutrophils and other macrophages were unaffected in the dt system (s22a fig), implying that the pf4+ macrophages were specifically depleted in pf4-cre+; idtr mice. of note, pf4+ macrophages belong to cd11b+ly6c+ macrophages (s22b fig). to examine whether the depletion of c8 pf4-positive macrophages would affect the secretion of second-wave of proinflammatory factors in vivo, we analyzed the expression of ccl7, ccl8, ccl12, cxcl12, spp1, and cxcl3 with rt-pcr analysis (fig 4b), and the expression of ccl8 and ccl2 with elisa assays (fig 4c and 4d) at day 8 p.i.. we found that the expression of pro-inflammatory factors was decreased in pf4-cre+; idtr mice when compared with that in pf4-cre-; idtr mice, further indicating that c8 pf4-positive macrophages were the major contributor to the second wave of pro-inflammatory factors. besides releasing a wave of pro-inflammatory factors, we found that c8 pf4-positive macrophages had high expression of pparg (fig 4e), a signature transcription factor that is essential']. Reference sentences:[]
Summary: Correlation patterns between pf4+ macrophages and pro-inflammatory factors in lung after iav infection were identified through transcriptional analysis.

Text 468
10.1371/journal.ppat.1008334
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig and s2 table). pairwise pearson correlations between each cluster were calculated based on the mean expression of each gene across all cells in the cluster for hierarchical clustering, showing the distinct relationship among different clusters (s1c fig and s3 table). we also found that the changes of several major clusters during iav infection with facs analysis were similar with that in scrna-seq data (s1d fig and s2 table), which further confirmed the scrna-seq data. to identify genes that were enriched in a specific cluster, the mean expression of each gene was calculated across all cells in the cluster and the log2 fold-change of differentially expressed genes was calculated relative to the other clusters. some significant genes (log2 fold change >1, p-value <0.01, benjamini-hochberg adjusted) and genes with high expression of the known markers of major cell types were shown in fig 1c. for example, many cells in cluster 5 (denoted c5) showed high expression of siglecf and cd11c (itgax), and were labeled as pulmonary alveolar macrophages (ams) (s2a fig). the above results, combined with further principal component analysis demonstrated that the immune cells in the lung comprised all major immune lineages, and the clusters were mainly comprised by monocyte/macrophage/dc-lineage (c1, c5, c8, c7, c10, and c17), lymphocyte-lineage (c2, c3, c4, c6, c11, and c12), granulocyte-lineage (c13, c14 and c16), erythrocyte-lineage (c9 and c15), and epithelial cell-lineage (c18) (s2 fig). the heterogenous components of cells in the lung during iav infection highlight the necessity of single-cell analysis for dissecting the iav-related immune cells in the lung in detail. iav infection initiates in the respiratory tract and spreads in the lung, which triggers widespread pulmonary immune responses. we fitted the cells from 18 clusters into different samples that were collected at different times. the distribution patterns of the 18 clusters sequentially changed at different time points after iav infection (s3 fig). massive changes to']. Reference sentences:[]
Summary: Correlation patterns between clusters of cells based on gene expression, showing distinct relationships. Changes in major clusters during infection were similar in different analyses, confirming data.

Text 469
10.1016/j.devcel.2020.01.033
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 4. in vitro-derived airway organoid cells recapitulate molecular features of native fetal airway cells (a) feature plots showing expression of bud tip progenitor markers sftpc and sox9 and basal cell marker tp63 from scrna-seq of in vitro cells at day 0 (bud tip progenitor maintenance), day 3 (after 3 days of dsa), and day 21 (3 days dsa, 18 days dsi). additional feature plots of the day 0 scrna-seq data are shown in figure 1c. (b) tsne projections from day 0, day 3, and day 21 in vitro-derived cells showing the sum of z-transformed expression levels of 331 fetal basal cell cluster markers, as identified from human fetal basal cells in figure 3, in day 0, day 3, and day 21 in vitro samples. (c–e) heatmap showing pearson’s correlation coefficients (pccs) of transcriptome between each of 2,000 randomly selected cell from each time point (day 0 [c], day 3 [d] and day 21 [e]) and the 12 fetal epithelial sub-clusters. pccs were calculated using log-normalized expression levels of genes that are top 50 markers in any of the fetal epithelial sub-clusters and detected in in vitro cells. colors represent range of pccs for all cells in each time point. (f) 21-day organoids were subjected to scrna-seq and visualized by tsne. colors represent the fetal cell type identity as described in figure 3 with the highest pcc to each individual 21-day cell. top right corner: feature plot showing expression pattern of epcam across day 21 cells. (c–f) mcp, multiciliated precursor; mc, multiciliated; ne, neuroendocrine; sp, secretory progenitor; bp, bud tip progenitor; ba, bud tip adjacent; bc, basal cell; smg, submucosal gland; smb, submucosal basal; gs, goblet-like secretory; ic, intermediate ciliated; cs, club-like secretory.']. Reference sentences:[additional feature plots from this same dataset are shown in figure 4a.sftpc is initially expressed at day 0 is greatly reduced by day 3 but increases again in specific cells by day 21 (figure 4a).tp63 is absent from day 0 cells but is detected in 26% of cells by day 3 and is detected in a more restricted subset cells (13%) by day 21 (figure 4a).to evaluate the transcriptomic similarity between in vitro- derived cells and in vivo fetal lung epithelial cells we quantified the transcriptome similarity of each cell to the in vivo epithelial cell cluster gene expression signatures as identified in figures 3b and 3c using pearson’s correlation coefficients (figure 4c).all cells of in vitro bud tip progenitor cells (day 0) displayed the highest degree of gene expression similarity with in vivo bud tip progenitor cells (figure 4c).facs-isolated cells from all 3 biological figure 4.]
Summary: Correlation patterns between in vitro-derived cells and fetal epithelial sub-clusters were analyzed using Pearson's correlation coefficients.

Text 470
10.1126/sciimmunol.aay5552
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 2. fr4 discriminates long-lived tfh from transcriptionally distinct tcm. (a) unsupervised hierarchical clustering using ward’s method: pca and tsne dimension reductions. (b) heatmap showing scaled, centered single-cell expression of top 15 genes sorted according to cluster average log fold change (fc) , adjusted p value of <0.05. (c to e) log-normalized expression of genes typical for tfh (c), tcm (d), and th1 (e) populations. (f) log-normalized average expression of published cd4+ signatures obtained by analysis of d7 effectors: tfh, tcm precursors, and th1. (g) scrna-seq: rank of ccr7 and izumo1r (encoding fr4) among spearman’s rank correlation coefficients between cxcr5 and all other genes, nicd protector versus untreated. (h) scaled, centered single-cell expression of izumo1r in comparison with other common gating markers. (i) scrna-seq: cxcr5 versus ccr7 on imputed data, colored by cluster. dropout imputed using seurat::addimputedscore. (j and k) flow cytometry analysis of ccr7, cxcr5, and fr4 on gp66-specific cd4+ memory subsets >50 days after infection gated as in fig.1d (j) or at the indicated time points after infection, with or without nicd protector (k). data represent n=2 independent experiments with n=4 mice (j).']. Reference sentences:[principal components analysis (pca) was used for dimension reduction hierarchical clustering of the cells and tsne visualization (fig 2a and fig s2b).seven distinct clusters were enriched for genes associated with the following: tfh cells (clusters 1 to 3 37% of cells) tcm cells (clusters 4 and 5 45% of cells) and th1 cells (clusters 6 and 7 18% of cells) (fig 2 a and b and fig s2b).the top defining genes in the tfh clusters included established tfh markers such as izumo1r pdcd1 and sh2d1a as well as transcription factors expressed by cd4+ memory cells including klf6 jun and junb (fig 2 b and c) (23 29).tcm and th1 clusters (4 to 7) exhibited higher expression of il7r s100a4 s100a6 selplg and various integrins (fig 2 b and d) whereas clusters 6 and 7 were enriched for genes associated with th1 differentiation including cxcr6 ccl5 nkg7 and id2 (fig 2 b and e).cluster cell type identities were confirmed by scoring each cell for signature genes obtained from publicly available datasets and exam- ining the scores across clusters (fig 2f and fig s2f).(20) (fig 2f).compared with cxcr5 and pdcd1 izumo1r served as a much cleaner transcriptional marker of the boundary between tfh and non-tfh cells (fig 2 g and h).unlike izumo1r cxcr5 expression was also detected in non-tfh clusters although with a slight decrease from tcm to th1 (fig 2h).these findings were confirmed at the protein level where cxcr5hi gating includes both fr4hi and fr4lo cells whereas fr4hi gating largely excludes cxcr5lo cells (fig 2k).unexpectedly ccr7 expression highest in clusters 4 and 5 was negatively correlated with cxcr5 in cells from animals treated with nicd protector (in the bottom 4% of all genes) whereas cells from untreated animals showed a slight positive correlation (in the top 27% of all genes) (fig 2g).5 eaay5552 (2020) 6 march 2020 scie n c e i m m u no lo gy | r esea r ch articl e 3 of 16 the bona fide tfh clusters (1 to 3) preferentially rescued from nicd as illustrated by imputed expression levels of cxcr5 versus ccr7 (fig 2i).a similar negative correlation was found between protein expression levels for ccr7 and cxcr5 with the highest ccr7- expressing cells falling within the ly6clopsgl1hi (hereafter tcm) compartment (fig 2j and fig s2g).5 eaay5552 (2020) 6 march 2020 scie n c e i m m u no lo gy | r esea r ch articl e 4 of 16 tsne 1 a 3210 4 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 3210 4 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 210 3 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 210 3 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 3210 4 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 3210 4 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 izumo1r rgs10 pdcd1 tcf7 id3 sh2d1a c il7r itgb1 itgb7 s100a4 itga4 s1pr1 d ccl5 nkg7 id2 ly6c2 cxcr6 selplg e 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 tsne 2 −3 −2 −1 0 1 2 3 scaled centered expression b 420 6 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 3210 4 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 43210 5 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 3210 4 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 210 3 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 210 3 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 210 3 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 3210 4 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 210 3 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 3210 4 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 3210 4 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 10 2 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 pc 1 pc 2 id2 cxcr6 rgs1 gzmk aw112010 ctla2a ccl4 serpina3g gimap4 mbnl1 gvin1 gm4070 ctla2b cyba ifi203 rps19 rplp0 gm8730 rpl35 actb junb jun fos malat1 cd28 smc4 tra2b klf6 gimap6 2310001h17rik dennd2d cd40lg fam101b ly6e shisa5 itgb1 gm42418 hmha1 ogt ccr7 srgn izumo1r tnfsf8 marcksl1 hspa5 prkca cd82 rap1a ptprc ikzf2 id3 tbc1d4 sostdc1 rnaset2b rnaset2a rgs10 pdcd1 sh2d1a hif1a ppp1r14b tubb2a tubb2b bcl2a1d bcl2a1b cdk2ap2 smco4 cd27 ccl5 nkg7 ly6c2 lgals1 crip1 s100a6 s100a4 s100a10 vim selplg dnajc15 klrd1 lgals3 emp3 ahnak i gene set average expression f g h ccr7 cxcr5 izumo1r cxcr5 pdcd1 ccr7 selplg ly6c2 ccr7 j izumo1r ccr7 (cxcr5) count nicd protector untreated day 157 0 10 10 10 3 4 5 no treatment nicd protector day 43 day 412 no treatment nicd protector no treatment nicd protector 0 103 104 105 0 103 104 105 0 10 10 10 3 4 5 0 10 10 10 3 4 5 0 10 10 10 3 4 5 0 103 104 105 0 103 104 105 0 10 10 4 5 0 10 10 4 5 0 103 104 0 103 104 k fr4 cxcr5 no treatment nicd protector day 15 0 103 104 105 0 103 104 105 0 103 104 105 0 103 104 105 0.4 0.6 0.8 0 .2 0 0 0.05 0.1 0.15 1000 500 0 0 0.1 0.2 −0.2 −0.1 tfh th1 tcmp 7 654321 7 654321 7 54321 6 0.25 0.5 0.75 1 1.25 0.25 0.5 0.75 0.25 0.5 0.75 1 fig 2.we additionally noted that hif1a a transcription factor normally associated with glycolysis was one of the top genes expressed by tfh cells consistent with the recently reported enrichment of this transcription factor in tfh effectors and resident memory cells (fig 2b) (37–39).5 eaay5552 (2020) 6 march 2020 scie n c e i m m u no lo gy | r esea r ch articl e 8 of 16 long-lived donor tfh cells maintained high expression of fr4 with or without antigen consistent with scrna-seq data identifying izumo1r/fr4 as a superior marker for long-lived tfh cells (fig 2 c and h and 4 d and e).]
Patterns related to correlation between cxcr5 and other genes, particularly izumo1r, in distinguishing tfh from non-tfh cells.

Text 471
10.1126/sciimmunol.aay5552
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 5. tfh cells generate multiple cell fates upon recall. (a) log-normalized average expression of genes tracking with tcf7 (90). (b) scrna-seq: rank of cd27 among spearman’s rank correlation coefficients between tcf7 and all other genes (left). cd27 versus tcf7 on imputed data (right), colored by cluster. (c and d) flow cytometry analysis of tcf1 (c) in wild type and cd27 (d) in mixed wild-type and p2x7r−/− bone marrow chimera mice in th1 (red), tcm (green), and tfh (blue) gp66-specific memory cells. (e) density of cells in pseudotime using monocle2 analysis. (f) gp66-specific th1, tcm, or tfh cd4+ t cells sorted at days 35 to 45 after lcmv infection and transferred into congenic naïve mice. recipient mice challenged with lcmv the following day. donor cell phenotype analyzed at day 12 after infection. (g) representative flow cytometry plots of th1, tcm, or tfh donor cell phenotype. (h and i) quantification of proportions (h) and numbers (i) of th1 effectors (red), tcm (green), and tfh effectors (blue) from th1, tcm, or tfh donors compared with endogenous response. data represent n=2 independent experiments with n=5 (c) or 3 to 14 (d to h) mice per group with the thin line depicting the mean and the dots representing cells from individual mice. (i) summarizes n=2 independent experiments with n=6 to 7 mice. one-way analysis of variance (anova) followed by tukey’s posttest for multiple comparisons (c) or unpaired two-tailed student’s t test (d and i) with p<0.05 and p<0.0001.']. Reference sentences:[although higher expression of tcf7 in long-lived tfh cells matched higher expression of tcf1 protein cd27 protein expression was substantially lower in tfh compared with th1 memory cells (fig 5 c and d).we observed higher expression of cd27 on p2x7r-deficient long- lived tfh cells compared with both wild-type tfh and th1 memory cells (fig 5d).in addition construction of a cell develop- mental trajectory indicated that tfh and th1 memory cells occupied opposite ends of a pseudotime trajectory predicting enhanced dif- ferentiation plasticity in one of these subsets (fig 5e and fig s5 b and c) (53).to test this in vivo long-lived tfh (fr4hipsgl1loly6clo) th1 memory (fr4lopsgl1hily6chi) and tcm (fr4lopsgl1hily6clo) cells were sorted from lcmv-infected mice and transferred into naïve congenic recipients followed by secondary challenge with lcmv (fig 5f).twelve days after recall in- fection transferred tfh cells differentiated into both tfh and th1 effectors demonstrating lineage flexibility (fig 5 g and h).con- sistent with a stem-like character transferred tfh donor cells also expanded most upon reactivation generating the largest pool of each secondary effector subset (fig 5i).in contrast tcm cells maintained the capacity to differentiate into both ly6chi and ly6clo effectors but generated few tfh effectors suggesting more limited plasticity (fig 5 g to i).consistent with several reports th1 memory cells almost exclusively gave rise to ly6chi effectors indicating more terminal differentiation of these cells (fig 5 g to i) (3 6).5 eaay5552 (2020) 6 march 2020 scie n c e i m m u no lo gy | r esea r ch articl e 9 of 16 a ly6c psgl1 cxcr5 pd1 0.70 −1030 103 104 105 0 −103 103 104 105 0.40 −1030 103 104 105 0 −103 103 104 105 35–45 days lcmv infect fr4− th1 memory r4− tcm memory day 12 analysis th1 memory donor: psgl1hily6chifr4− tcmdonor: psgl1hily6clofr4− th1 memory donor psgl1hily6chifr4− tfh memory donor psgl1hily6clofr4+ naïve (endogenous) donor cells (%) 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 0.05 0.10 0.15 gene set average expression b f h lcmv challenge tcf7-regulated genes 0 20 40 60 80 100 tcm donor psgl1hily6clofr4− 19.7 −1030 103 104 105 0 −103 103 104 105 16.9 −1030 103 104 105 0 −103 103 104 105 tfh memory donor: psgl1loly6clofr4+ fr4+ tfh memory e c 2.52 −1030 103 104 105 0 −103 103 104 105 1.80 −1030 103 104 105 0 −103 103 104 105 tcf1 (mfi) tcf1 count 0 200 400 600 800 0 103 104 0 20 40 60 80 100 0.59 −1030 103 104 105 0 −103 103 104 105 fr4 psgl1 1.40 −1030 103 104 105 0 −103 103 104 105 19.0 −1030 103 104 105 0 −103 103 104 105 cd27 mfi cd27 cd27 wild type p2x7r−/− cd27 count (tcf7 ) cd27 tcf7 0 200 400 600 −0.1 0.0 0.1 0.2 0 103 104 0 20 40 60 80 100 0 103 104 0 20 40 60 80 100 d g count cluster i th1 tfh tcm th1 tfh 0 1000 2000 3000 −8 −4 0 4 −8 −4 0 4 −8 −4 −8 −4 0 4 −8 −4 0 4 −8 −4 −8 −4 0 4 −8 −4 0 4 0 4 0 4 0.50 1 1.5 2 density pseudotime 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 overlay 654321 7 th1 memory donor psgl1hily6chifr4− tfh memory donor psgl1hily6clofr4+ tcm donor psgl1hily6clofr4− donor cells (#) 2° th1 effector 2° tcm effector 2° tfh effector 101 102 103 104 105 fig 5.]
Summary: Correlation patterns between tcf7 and cd27 in different cell fates, pseudotime analysis, and lineage flexibility of tfh cells upon recall infection.

Text 472
10.1089/hum.2019.366
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 4. correlation analysis of the mcherry transgene and endogenous gene expression.']. Reference sentences:[aavrh.10 vector‐mediated transgene transfer is hep1‐tropic to identify genes that may favor aavrh.10‐mediated transgene expression pearson’s correlation coefficient (pcc) analysis was performed on expression levels between mcherry and other endogenous genes in hep1 hep2 and hep3 respectively to identify endogenous genes that are positively correlated with the transgene expression (figure 4a).interestingly there were 10 common genes with moderate positive relationship (r > 0.4) to mcherry expression identified in all the three subpopulations including ttr mup20 gpx1 fabp1 mgst1 apoa2 serpina1c serpina1b b2m and serpina3k (figure 4b).protein‐protein interaction analysis using the string database indicated that most of these genes have co‐expression relationships in mice (figure 4b).in our data the hepatocytes expressing the mcherry‐correlated gene signature including gpx1 mgst1 and fabp1 barely overlapped with the hepatocytes expressing the insulin‐ responsive gene signature (figure 4c).it is likely that the antioxidant gene gpx1 suppress the receptor tyrosine kinase activities (i.e. insulin and egf receptors) and reduce the resistance of aav transduction by these receptors thus indirectly leading to higher aavrh.10‐mediated transgene expression in these cells (figure 4d).regarding the subpopulation markers 72.7% of the hep1‐specific markers were positively correlated with mcherry expression (r > 0.2 figure 4e).only 4.9% hep2 and hep3‐specific marker genes were positively correlated with the mcherry expression (figure 4f).figure 4. correlation analysis of the mcherry transgene and endogenous gene expression.]
Summary: Correlation patterns between mcherry transgene and endogenous gene expression in different cell subpopulations were identified, with common genes showing moderate positive relationships.

Text 473
10.1038/s41587-020-0442-2
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 3 and supplementary tables 3 and 4; see also section “correlated gene modules”). annotation of the singlet background model of dataset ii was performed by expression of marker genes according to the literature, as described in the following table.']. Reference sentences:[we demonstrate this application when applying pic-seq in vivo (fig 3 and 4).co-cultured t cells show strong activation kinetics with a reduction in the relative intensity of the basal t-helper precur- sor program (klf2 sell) early induction of an interferon type-i response (stat1 irf7) and later waves of signaling and metabolic activation (myc and npm1) programs followed by a strong t cell proliferation signature observed after 44 h (see supplementary fig 3).co-cultured dc single-cell states exhibited rapid induction of co-stimulatory molecules (cd40 dll4 and ebi3) with a parallel induction of irf8 and related genes (cst3 ccl22; see supplementary fig 3).we dissociated neonate lung tissue with the elastase enzyme which we found 48 h intradermal nb/pbs extract ln sort singlets and pics umis (log2) umis (log2) naive t cells cd8 t cells cd8 memory t cells pdcs monocytes migratory dcs cdc1 cells cdc2 cells tregs activated t cells t cell identity apc identity infection ag+ ag+ t cell identity apc identity infection pbs nb cd11c (apc) tcrβ (apc cy7) 0.31 ± 0.06% 3.1 ± 0.88% 83.18 ± 1.66% c dapi tcβ cd11c merge 7462 cells 2667 cells 30 mm dapi cd11c gfp tcrb tcrβ cd11c 0.43% 2.33% 46.5% 43% 0.12% 1.96% strong liberase mild liberase 10 mm frequency in pics doublets triplets tcf4 siglech lyz2 tgfbi csf1r fcer1g cd209d cd209a naaa ppt1 tmem123 fscn1 ccl22 ctla4 icos foxp3 srm nolc1 dut xcl1 ctla2a ctsw nkg7 cd8a cd8b1 sell tcf7 trbc2 tcf4 siglech lyz2 tgfbi csf1r fcer1g cd209d cd209a naaa ppt1 tmem123 fscn1 ccl22 ctla4 icos foxp3 srm nolc1 dut xcl1 ctla2a ctsw nkg7 cd8a cd8b1 sell tcf7 trbc2 0 1 8 14 8 14 mixing dcs t cells a b c d e f g h i j k l 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 0log(normalized umis) max fig 3 | studying t cell–myeloid interactions in an in vivo infection model.immune response to infection is initiated through pathogen detec- tion by apcs leading to their migration to the draining lns where they interact with t cells and initiate an immune cascade10 (fig 3a) with a major impact on infectious disease and cancer1137.to char- acterize t cell–apc pics in the draining lns we first calibrated a suitable tissue dissociation protocol to ensure preservation of interacting conjugates (fig 3b and see supplementary fig 6 and methods).after 48 h we extracted and mildly dissociated the auricu- lar draining lns and sorted the cells by their expression of tcrβ and cd11c (fig 3cd and see supplementary fig 6).we used facs to identify a small yet reproducible tcrβ+cd11c+ pic popula- tion (0.31 ± 0.06%) and verified that spurious doublet contribution to the pic gate was <25% (fig 3d and see supplementary fig 6).we used confocal microscopy to assess tissue dissociation and sort- ing efficiency of pics and revealed that 87% of the pic gate events consisting of two cells showed typical immune synapses associated with a heterotypic doublet structure whereas 13% of the particles were likely to represent triplets (mostly of two t cells and one dc) (fig 3ef and see supplementary fig 6).metacell analysis of the background single-cell populations revealed high heteroge- neity among t cells and apcs (fig 3g–i and see supplementary fig 6).using the pic-seq pipeline we inferred for each pic the putative identities of its t cell and apc partners and their mixing factor (fig 3j–l and see supplementary fig 7).at early time points post-infection the pathogen-specific crosstalk of innate–adaptive cells may be limited to small sub- sets of apcs and antigen-specific t cells an effect that could be overlooked even with state-of-the-art technologies because of the dominance of background bystander cells (see fig 3a).we repeated this procedure for dc metacells (with a correlation threshold of 0.2) resulting in a list of 238 genes divided into 20 modules (see supplementary fig 3 and supplementary table 4).source data for fig 3f and 4i and supplementary fig 2 and 6 are presented with the paper.source data for fig 3f fig 4i and supplementary fig 2 and 6 have been provided as supplementary source data.]
Patterns related to correlation between t cell and apc interactions in an infection model.

Text 474
10.15252/embj.2020104486
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 4a). scenic defines the regulon as an ensemble of genes coregulated by a single transcription factor and determines the regulon(s) active in single cells in three steps. first, covariation of the expression levels of the genes is estimated in the single-cell dataset. then, each group of genes displaying covariation is screened for common cis-regulatory motifs present in the group. this defines groups of genes regulated by a specific transcription factor (=regulon). finally, the activity of each regulon is estimated in each cell of the dataset (aibar et al, 2017). of note, this analysis was done independently of our initial clustering based on the expression levels. the clustering of the wt ni cells based on the regulons is highly comparable to the expression-based clustering, with a high overlap between the two clustering approaches, as estimated by the rand index or ri (rand, 1971; ri = 0.83; see the materials and methods section). this overlap highlights the robustness of our initial clustering. the scenic analysis allowed us to associate specific regulons to each cluster (fig 4a). concordant with previous reports, the analysis highlighted a positive correlation between the regulon lz and the crystal cells. lz is a runx transcription factor essential for the differentiation of these cells (lebestky et al, 2000). the pl-rel, plamp, and pl-vir1 clusters are characterized by the regulons jra (jnk cascade), rel (imd pathway), and ets21c (which cooperates with the jnk pathway). the regulon activating transcription factor 3 (atf3) involved in anti-viral response in mammals (labzin et al, 2015) is specific to pl-vir1 and pl-rel, whereas the regulon creba regulating the secretory pathway is specific to the pl-amp cluster, which expresses most of the antimicrobial peptides. the pl-prolif cluster and the closely related cluster pl-inos (fig 4b) are enriched for the regulons ecr and e2f1 that are involved in the regulation of hemocyte proliferation (sinenko et al, 2010). pl-lsp is associated with the tbp regulon that is involved in the canonical transcriptional machinery. such enrichment may indicate a higher rate of transcription, which would be concordant with the function of this cluster in producing storage proteins in preparation for pupariation. pl-robo2 is enriched for the regulons of the gata factors pnr and srp, which is known to regulate the expression of scavenger receptors in the hemocytes (shlyakhover et al, 2018; valanne et al, 2018). at last, pl-impl2 is enriched in ham, kn, cg9609, and nf-yb. ham was shown to limit amplifying divisions in neural stem cells (eroglu et al, 2014). cg9609 is a zinc finger transcription factor poorly described, expressed mostly in ovaries (robinson et al, 2013), and nf-yb regulates cell death and proliferation (ly et al, 2013).']. Reference sentences:[]
Patterns of gene co-regulation, identified as regulons, correlate with specific cell clusters in single-cell data. Regulatory motifs and transcription factors are associated with distinct cellular functions.

Text 475
10.15252/embj.2020104486
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 4. identification of the cluster-specific molecular pathways and of the filiation between the ni clusters. a heatmap representing the z-score for the top 5 regulons of each cluster determined with scenic. the dendrogram on the left side of the panel indicates the correlation between the regulons across the dataset. the z-score is indicated with a gradient from magenta (z-score < 0, the regulon is repressed) to yellow (zscore > 0, the regulon is active). b dendrogram representing the distance among the clusters. the tree was built on the correlation (spearman) calculated on the regulon matrix from the ni dataset. c lineage prediction using rna velocity. the arrows and lines on the umap predict the “direction” taken by the cells of each cluster, based on the comparison between the levels of mrna and pre-mrna. note that the clusters cc and pl-impl2 (dashed lines) have been moved from their original position to fit in the graph. d single-cell trajectory reconstructed with monocle 2 on the ni dataset. the first panel shows the overlap of all clusters, and subsequent panels show restricted number of clusters for which the rna velocity analysis suggested a filiation.']. Reference sentences:[8 of 25 the embo journal e104486 | 2020 ª 2020 the authors the embo journal pierre b cattenoz et al fig 4a).the scenic analysis allowed us to associate specific regulons to each cluster (fig 4a).the pl-prolif cluster and the closely related cluster pl-inos (fig 4b) are enriched for the regulons ecr and e2f1 that are involved in the regulation of hemocyte proliferation (sinenko et al 2010).following this the cluster identities were appended to the rna velocity map (fig 4c).the map suggests that pl-prolif/pl-inos is at the origin of most clusters that pl-0 pl-1 pl-2 and pl-3 are derived from pl-inos and that pl-vir1 pl-rel and pl-robo2 are issued from pl-3 pl-0 and pl-2 (fig 4c).at last no clear direc- tionality could be drawn for pl-amp pl-pcd cc and pl-impl2 which suggests that their direct progenitors are not detected in our dataset (fig 4c).the monocle analysis identi- fied trajectories in line with the branches observed with rna velocity (fig 4d).ª 2020 the authors the embo journal e104486 | 2020 9 of 25 pierre b cattenoz et al the embo journal pl.robo2 a b correlation (spearman) between the ni clusters dendrogram based on the regulon z-scores c lineage prediction (rna velocity) d lineage prediction (monocle 2) component 1 component 2 pl.inos pl.prolif pl.1 pl.2 pl.robo2 pl.rel pl.3 component 1 component 2 pl.inos pl.prolif pl.3 pl.0 component 1 component 2 pl.inos pl.prolif pl.robo2 pl.pcd pl.amp pl.vir1 component 1 component 2 pl.inos pl.prolif cc pl.impl2 component 1 component 2 pl.lsp cc pl.impl2 pl.lsp pl.1 pl.2 pl.robo2 pl.inos pl.prolif pl.3 pl.0 pl.rel pl.pcd pl.amp pl.vir1 component 1 component 2 he2f1 ecr crp pnt lzjim runxb ctcf cnx99a tbp kni zif cg9609 kn ham bink7.1 nf−yb emc atf3 usf ets21c rel crebb jra xbp1 creba luna kay srp cipnr l(3)neo38 foxo pl.inos pl.prolif pl.1 pl.3 cc pl.pcd pl.amp pl.vir1 pl.rel pl.0 pl.lsp pl.robo2 pl.impl2 −2 −1 0 1 2 z-score top regulons (scenic) pl.2 pl.2 pl.0 pl.lsp pl.amp pl.vir1 pl.rel pl.pcd pl.impl2 cc pl.1 pl.3 pl.inos pl.prolif 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 distance (1-correlation[spearman]) umap 1 umap 2 c g p ( y) pl−2 pl−1 pl−robo2 pl−0 pl−3 pl−inos pl−rel pl−lsp pl−vir1 pl−pcd pl−impl2 pl−prolif cc pl-amp figure 4.a lineage prediction for the clusters from the wi sample using rna velocity as in fig 4c.]
Patterns related to correlation between regulons across clusters, cluster lineage prediction, and single-cell trajectory reconstruction are shown in the figure.

Text 476
10.1016/j.cell.2020.02.048
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure s1. single-cell rna-seq analysis of mouse pancreatic cells, related to figure 1 (a) quality metrics for the pancreatic scrna-seq data. distributions of the number of umis per cell (left) and the number of genes detected per cell (right) are shown. (b) reproducibility between 3 biological replicates. average gene expression values (log2(tpm+1)) across all cells of three scrna-seq experiments are used for the calculation (r = pearson correlation coefficient).']. Reference sentences:[]
Summary: Correlation patterns of gene expression values across different cells in mouse pancreatic cells.

Text 477
10.1242/dev.183855
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure s6: weighted gene correlation network analysis. (a) module identification in the weighted gene correlation network, with significant modules indicated by colored labels. (b) heatmap of genes in the identified quiescence and biosynthetic modules in quiescent and activated cells. (c) gene ontology enrichment analysis for genes in the identified quiescence and biosynthetic modules. the quiescence module is notably enriched for stress response and cell death regulation genes, while the biosynthetic module is enriched for rna and protein biosynthesis.']. Reference sentences:[]
Summary: Identification of gene modules with correlated expression patterns in quiescent and activated cells, enriched for stress response and biosynthesis functions.

Text 478
10.1242/dev.183855
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 4: aged muscs display transcriptional changes across many genes. (a) aged and young cells labeled in t-sne projection of transcriptional space. (b) heatmap of differentially expressed genes between aged and young muscs. expression is mean centered and variance scaled for each gene(q <0.05, wilcoxon rank sums, bonferroni corrected). 7,128 aged cells; 11,052 young cells in comparisons. (c) gene ontology analysis for differentially ex-pressed genes. (d) gene-wise auroc analysis demonstrates that single gene is not predictive of musc age state. (e) correlation of aged and young transcriptomes. each axis is the mean expression level in muscs of the indicated age and each point is a single gene. (f) chronovariant genes displayed on a dot plot. darker colors indicate higher expression, larger dots indicate expression in a larger proportion of cells. (g) svm classification accuracy versus regularization (l1) strength identifies a subset of genes for age discrimination. (h) classification performance for aged vs. young lrcs, nonlrcs, and the total musc pool. all classifiers display>92% accuracy.']. Reference sentences:[similar to our cell behavior analysis we find that aged muscs do not segregate discretely in transcriptional space (fig 4a).we used differential expression analysis to identify 174 differentially expressed genes between aged and young cells when comparing both quiescent and activated cells (fig 4b table s4).go analysis of these genes indicates that they represent biosynthetic processes and stress responses with protein translation processes upregulated with aging and stress responses downregulated (fig 4c).no single gene serves as a good biomarker as assessed using the area under the roc (auroc) (fig 4d).we identified a set of candidate development • accepted manuscript “chrono-variant” genes that change with age focusing on the case of activated muscs where differences are more pronounced (fig 4f g methods).classifying activated lrc age we identify a set of 54 genes that yield a prediction accuracy of roughly 85% (hold-out validation table s6) (fig 4h).for nonlrc classification we identify 104 genes that yield a predictive accuracy of roughly 96% (hold-out validation fig 4h table s6 figure s9).classifying the activated young and aged musc pools (each sampled to model physiological lrc:nonlrc ratios) we identify a set 99 genes that provide roughly 95% classification accuracy (fig 4h table s7).]
Patterns of gene expression related to age in muscs, with no single gene serving as a reliable biomarker for age discrimination.

Text 479
10.1242/dev.183855
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 5: activation induces differential responses in lrcs and nonlrcs. (a) lrcs and nonlrcs labeled in a t-sne visualization of transcriptional space. (b) expression of known myogenic regulatory genes in quiescent and activated lrcs and nonlrcs. larger dots indicate a greater proportion of expressing cells, darker colors indicate higher expression. only myod1 differences in activation are significant (q <0.05, wilcoxon rank sums, bonferroni corrected). (c) correlation between young lrc and nonlrc mean gene ex-pression values in quiescence and activation. 6,743 lrcs and 7,184 nonlrcs in comparison. (d) significant differentially expressed genes between lrcs and nonlrcs in quiescent and activated conditions (q <0.05, wilcoxon rank sums, bonferroni corrected). few transcriptional differences are present in quiescence, but activation manifests differential expression across many genes. (e) lrc:nonlrc classification performance across activation states and ages. classifiers more readily discriminate lrcs from nonlrcs in activation. (f) distribution of quiescent and activated lrcs/nonlrcs in transcriptional clusters indicates a heterogeneous activation response. (g) edu incorporation by lrcs and nonlrcs during early activation in culture (n= 3 mice; 10,279 lrcs; 13,464 nonlrcs; p <0.001, wald test). (h) edu incorporation bypax3+andpax3-cells during early activation in culture (n= 5 mice; 5,169 pax+ cells; 4, 130 pax3- cells; p <0.001, wald test).']. Reference sentences:[similar to aged and young cells lrcs and nonlrcs appear to share a transcriptional state space (fig 5a).we found that the majority of myogenic markers are not differentially expressed between lrcs and nonlrcs in this assay (fig 5b).likewise the mean gene expression levels between the two states have a near perfect correlation in quiescent cells (𝑝 = 0.99 fig 5c).however myod1 is upregulated in lrcs after activation but not in quiescence (fig 5b).regression analysis of mean gene expression levels between the lrc and nonlrc states reveals a near perfect correlation in quiescent cells but in activation the mean gene development • accepted manuscript expression values are less correlated (𝑝 < 0.001 fisher’s 𝑝 to 𝑧 transformation fig 5c).considering quiescent and activated cells separately there are only 14 differentially expressed genes in quiescent cells but 195 differentially expressed genes in activated cells (fig 5d table s9 s10).roughly 60% of activated lrcs are in the most activated transcriptional cluster 4 compared to only 40% of the activated nonlrcs (fig 5f).lrcs incorporated edu at a higher rate (21%) than nonlrcs (17%) across three animals and 𝑛 ≈ 20000 cells (fig 5g; 𝑝 < 0.001 wald test logistic regression; methods).similar to our experiment in lrcs/nonlrcs we found that highly regenerative pax3+ muscs likewise activate more rapidly than pax3- counterparts (fig 5h; 𝑝 < 0.001 wald test logistic regression; methods) consistent with another report (de morree et al. 2019).classification of quiescent cells performs poorly at both ages (roughly 65% accuracy) while classification of activated cells is more effective – roughly 85% accuracy for young cells and 80% for aged cells (fig 5e fig s10c).this decreased frequency of lineage regression may contribute to the more rapid activation of lrcs we observe based on transcriptional profiles (fig 5) and edu incorporation (fig 5g).]
Correlation between gene expression levels in quiescent and activated single cells, with differential expression patterns upon activation.

Text 480
10.7150/thno.40663
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 1. human cd8+ t-cells impair endothelial cell proliferation and survival in hyperglycemia. (a) flow cytometric quantification of %cd3+cd8+ cells in the ischemic muscles of normoglycemic (n=4) and t2d (n=7) patients with pad, respectively. (b) scatter plots showing a negative correlation between %cd31+cd144+ ecs and %cd3+cd8+ t-cells in the ischemic muscles of normoglycemic and t2d patients. (c) in vitro tube formation assay, scale bars: 100 um; and (d) quantification of total tubule length of hesc-ecs cultured in normoglycemic (25 mm l-glucose) or hyperglycemic (25 mm d-glucose) condition with cd3+cd8+ sorted cells and their conditioned medium, respectively. (e, g) immunostaining and (f, h) quantifications for ki67+ or ccasp3+ (green) and cd31+ (red) cells with nuclear dapi counterstain (blue) showing significantly reduced numbers of ki67+cd31+ cells and increased numbers of ccasp3+cd31+ cells among total cd31+ hesc-ecs per unit area after cultured in 25 mm d- than l-glucose (n=3 independent experiments), scale bars: 50 µm. (a, b, d, f, h) all data are presented as mean +/- s.e.m., indicates p<0.05, p<0.01 and p<0.001.']. Reference sentences:[when we reanalysed the data we found that there were significantly increased %cd3+cd8+ t-cells in the ischemic tissues of t2d than normoglycemic patients (figure 1a).statistical analysis revealed a negative correlation between the vascular density and tissue infiltration of cd8+ t-cells in the ischemic tissues of these patients (figure 1b pearson’s correlation coefficient r = -0.53).we cultured mature hesc-ecs in 25 mm l- or d-glucose with solvent control (pbs) human cd8+ t-cells and their conditioned medium respectively (figure 1c-h).cd8+ t-cells or their conditioned medium significantly reduced the total tubule length of ecs compared to that of the control in both l- and d-glucose respectively (figure 1c-d).to ask if cd8+ t-cells impaired angiogenesis by reducing ec proliferation or survival we performed co-staining for specific markers of ecs cd31 and proliferation ki67 (figure 1e) or apoptosis cleaved caspase 3 (ccasp3 figure 1g).our results showed that cd8+ t-cells or their conditioned medium significantly reduced %ki67+cd31+ (figure 1f) and increased %ccasp3+cd31+ (figure 1h) ecs compared to that of the control.moreover it appeared that direct contact with cd8+ t-cells was more efficient than the para- crine effect of conditioned medium in promoting ec apoptosis (figure 1h).furthermore d-glucose alone could significantly impede tube formation (figure 1d) and inhibit proliferation (figure 1f) of ecs compared to l-glucose.the capability of cd8+ t-cells or their conditioned medium in inhibiting proliferation (figure 1f) or promoting apoptosis (figure 1h) of ecs was also enhanced in d- than l-glucose suggesting that cd8+ t-cells and d-glucose could have a synergistic effect in regulating angiogenesis.cd8 checkpoint blockade unleashes the poised commitment of effector cd8+ t-cells from leprdb/db mice after injury since the conditioned media of cd8+ t-cells directly impaired both human (figure 1) and murine (figure 2) angiogenesis we attempted to determine the paracrine factors upregulated in cd8+ t-cells of leprdb/db mice when compared to that of leprdb/+ mice.]
Negative correlation between CD8+ T-cells and endothelial cell proliferation and survival in hyperglycemia, impacting angiogenesis.

Text 481
10.7150/thno.40663
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 2. murine cd8+ t-cells impair endothelial cell proliferation and survival in hyperglycemia. (a) schematic diagram showing experimental design. flow cytometric quantification of the absolute numbers of (b) cd45-cd31+ and (c) cd3+cd8+ cells in the ischemic and non-ischemic muscles of leprdb/+ and leprdb/db mice (n=5 per group) at 2 weeks after injury, respectively. (d) scatter plots showing a negative correlation between %cd45-cd31+ ecs and %cd3+cd8+ t-cells in the ischemic muscles of leprdb/+ and leprdb/db mice. (e) in vitro tube formation assay, scale bars: 100 um; and (f) quantification of total tubule length of muring lung ecs cultured in normoglycemic (25 mm l-glucose) or hyperglycemic (25 mm d-glucose) condition with cd3+cd8+ sorted cells and their conditioned medium, respectively. (g, i) immunostaining and (h, j) quantifications for ki67+ (green, scale bar: 100 µm) or ccasp3+ (green, scale bar: 50 µm) and cd31+ (red) cells with nuclear dapi counterstain (blue) showing significantly reduced numbers of ki67+cd31+ cells and increased numbers of ccasp3+cd31+ cells among total cd31+ lung ecs per unit area after cultured in 25 mm d- than l-glucose (n=3 independent experiments). (b-d, f, h, j) all data are presented as mean +/- s.e.m., indicates p<0.05, p<0.01 and p<0.001.']. Reference sentences:[we utilized the control leprdb/+ and t2d leprdb/db mice; and analysed data at 2 weeks after induction of hindlimb ischemia (figure 2a).we observed a significantly reduced number of cd45-cd31+ ecs (figure 2b) and increased number of cd3+cd8+ t-cells (figure 2c) in the ischemic muscles of leprdb/db than leprdb/+ mice.we also demonstrated a negative correlation between the vascular density and tissue infiltration of cd8+ t-cells in the ischemic muscles (figure 2d r = -0.78).to ask if cd8+ t-cells can directly impair murine angiogenesis we cultured murine lung ecs in 25 mm l- or d-glucose with solvent control (pbs) murine cd8+ t-cells and their conditioned medium respectively (figure 2e-j).cd8+ t-cells or their conditioned medium significantly reduced the total tubule length of ecs compared to that of the control in both l- and d-glucose respectively (figure 2e-f).we also performed co-staining for cd31 ki67 and ccasp3 (figure 2g i).cd8+ t-cells or their con- ditioned medium significantly reduced %ki67+cd31+ (figure 2h) and increased %ccasp3+cd31+ (figure 2j) ecs compared to the control.moreover direct contact with cd8+ t-cells was more efficient than the conditioned medium in promoting ec apoptosis (figure 2j).furthermore d-glucose alone could significantly impede tube formation (figure 2f) inhibit proliferation (figure 2h) and promote apoptosis (figure 2j) of ecs compared to l-glucose.the capability of cd8+ t-cells or their conditioned medium in inhibiting proliferation (figure 2h) or promoting apoptosis (figure 2j) of ecs was enhanced in d- than l-glucose.cd8 checkpoint blockade unleashes the poised commitment of effector cd8+ t-cells from leprdb/db mice after injury since the conditioned media of cd8+ t-cells directly impaired both human (figure 1) and murine (figure 2) angiogenesis we attempted to determine the paracrine factors upregulated in cd8+ t-cells of leprdb/db mice when compared to that of leprdb/+ mice.]
Summary: Negative correlation between endothelial cell density and CD8+ T-cell infiltration in ischemic muscles, leading to impaired angiogenesis in hyperglycemia.

Text 482
10.7150/thno.40663
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 3. cd8 checkpoint blockade potentiates endothelial cell proliferation in leprdb/db mice after injury. (a) schematic diagram showing experimental design. flow cytometric quantification of the absolute numbers of (b) cd3+cd8+ and (c) cd45-cd31+ cells in the ischemic and non-ischemic muscles of igg2a- or yts105-treated leprdb/db mice (n=4-5 per group) at 2 weeks after injury, respectively. (d) scatter plots showing a negative correlation between cd45-cd31+ ecs and cd3+cd8+ t-cells in the ischemic muscles of igg2a- or yts105-treated mice. (e) immunostaining on frozen sections and quantification for ki67+ (green), ccasp3+ (green) or sma+ (green) and cd31+ (red) cells with nuclear dapi counterstain (blue) showing (f) significantly increased ki67+cd31+ proliferating ecs and (g) reduced ccasp3+cd31+ apoptotic cells at day 7 after injury; and (h) increased number of cd31+ cells and (i) increased number of sma+cd31+ blood vessels at day 14 after injury. results are demonstrated as cells counted per unit area in the ischemic muscles of yts105- than igg2a-treated mice, n=5 per group, scale bars: 50 µm. (j) quantitative rt-pcr of cd45-cd31+ ecs purified from the ischemic muscles at day 7 after injury by flow cytometry; gene expression levels of the yts105- are compared to that of igg2a-treated group, n=3 per group. (b-d, f-i) all data are presented as mean +/- s.e.m., indicates p<0.05, p<0.01 and p<0.001.']. Reference sentences:[there was significantly reduced infiltration of cd3+cd8+ t-cells (figure 3b) and increased cd45-cd31+ ec density (figure 3c) in the ischemic muscles of yts105- than igg2a- (isotype control) treated leprdb/db mice with a significant negative correlation coefficient (r = -0.82 figure 3d) at 2 weeks after injury.moreover there were significantly increased numbers of cd31+ ecs (figure 3h) and of sma+cd31+ blood vessels (figure 3i) in the ischemic muscles of yts105- than igg2a-treated group at 2 weeks after injury.we showed significantly upregulated expression levels of ang1 pdgfb vegfa scf and sdf1a in ecs of yts105- than igg2a-treated group (figure 3i).]
Negative correlation between endothelial cells and T-cells, increased proliferation and reduced apoptosis of endothelial cells, and upregulated gene expression in endothelial cells after treatment.

Text 483
10.1016/j.celrep.2020.03.004
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 5. validation of putative analogous engineered populations relative to native (a) heatmap of pearson correlation of all native and engineered clusters on variable genes used to cluster the native sample (2,424 genes). (b) dot plot of key genes across all of the native and engineered clusters.']. Reference sentences:[these markers were not expressed in the starting figure 5.the krt5-expressing population in lung was characterized as ‘‘basal-like’’ for its reduced pearson correlation with the native bc population (figure 5a).to that end we ran a pear- son correlation between all native and engineered subpopula- tions using the variable gene list used to cluster the native tracheal epithelium (figure 5a).once overall correlation was confirmed for a large set of defining genes we performed a split dot plot on key defining genes to compare expression level and specificity among subpopulations (figure 5b).putative cluster identifications of differentiated samples were compared to those of the native tracheal epithelial control to evaluate relatedness to native clusters by pearson correlation (figure 5a bioinfokit).]
Summary: Correlation patterns between native and engineered clusters based on gene expression levels.

Text 484
10.1038/s41586-020-2157-4
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 4 | cross-species comparison of cell landscapes. a, correlation of orthologous gene expression between human and mouse cell types. auroc scores were used to measure the similarity of cell types: red, high correlation; blue and yellow, low correlation, based on the spearman correlation between all human and mouse pseudo-cells (n = 46,793 pseudo-cells). cluster and species information is marked by different colours. b, circos plot showing the similarity of cell types in human and mouse. paired cell types with average auroc scores greater than 0.9 are connected by lines. c, identification of regulon modules based on the regulon matrix of the hcl and the mca. the']. Reference sentences:[a correlation heat map among 102 human and 104 mouse cell types showed that cell-type similarity in orthologous gene expression overrides species differences particularly for immune and epithelial cells (fig 4a).as revealed by the circos plot the gene expression patterns of major mammalian cell types are conserved; about 95% of cell types have a strong correlation (area under the receiver operating characteristics (auroc) score > 0.9) between species (fig 4b).we extracted tf regulons from both hcl and mca data using scenic45 and identified 140 orthologous tf regulons grouped into 15 major modules across the mammalian cell landscapes (fig 4c supplementary table 5).these modules are enriched with not only lineage-specific transcription factors but also conserved binding motifs that lead to co-ordinated module activation in the lineage establishment (fig 4c).for example the sox10 regulon for oligodendrocytes and sox11 regulon for neurons are shared between human and mouse (fig 4d).notably the development-related sox4 regulon dominates the unseparated fetal cell clusters; it shows a broad and stochastic distribution for both human and mouse (fig 4e).extended data fig 4 | t-sne maps for examples of analysed adult tissues in the hcl.]
Summary: Conserved correlation of gene expression patterns across human and mouse cell types, with shared regulon modules and transcription factors.

Text 485
10.1038/s41586-020-2157-4
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 2a, b). this strategy enabled us to interpret transcription factor (tf) function and generate a correlation network that covers 91% of all human tfs (extended data fig 2c; supplementary table 2). a highlight of the network suggests that, in the hcl, master tfs work in discrete modules to specify major human cell types such as neuron, erythroid cell, and acinar cell (extended data fig 2d). the resource is publicly available at http://bis.zju.edu.cn/hcl/ (with a mirror website for international users at https://db.cngb.org/hcl/).']. Reference sentences:[]
Summary: Correlation network reveals TF modules specifying cell types, covering 91% of human TFs. Master TFs work in discrete modules.

Text 486
10.1038/s41586-020-2157-4
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 3 | application of schcl analysis for stem cell biology. a, diagram showing the pipeline for schcl analysis. b, c, schcl results for pancreatic islet cells (b; n = 4,156 cells) derived from seven-stage differentiation of h9 cells (day 24) and haematopoietic cells (c; n = 1,115 cells) derived from h9/op9 cell co-cultures (day 9). each row represents one cell type in our reference. each column represents data from a single cell. pearson correlation coefficient was used to evaluate cell-type gene expression similarity. red indicates a high correlation; grey indicates a low correlation. some cell-type data come from published works, as denoted by first author name: segerstolpe27, muraro28, baron29, han57. d, branching gene expression trajectory analysis of day 20']. Reference sentences:[input digital gene expression (dge) data were com- pared to each transcriptome reference to provide a match score based on gene expression correlation (fig 3a).many cells present in the differentiated culture on day 24 exhibited a strong correlation with pancreatic cell types (fig 3b).only cells from c7 and c11 which contained endothelial cells and erythroid cells had high schcl scores for mature human cell types (fig 3c).trajectory and rna velocity analysis suggested that the undefined cell clusters were at the root of the differentiation hierarchy with high rna turnover rate whereas the defined cell types are at the endpoint of the trajectory and have relatively stable transcriptomes (fig 3d).we also found similar patterns for the human haematopoietic differentiation system using single-cell data from cd34+ cord blood and cd34+ mobilized peripheral blood (mpb; fig 3e f).article extended data fig 3 | t-sne maps for examples of analysed fetal tissues in the hcl.]
Summary: Correlation patterns in gene expression among different cell types in stem cell differentiation.

Text 487
10.1038/s41587-020-0470-y
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 3 | multiplexed crispri/crispra and hybridization-based target enrichment to enable scalable and versatile single-cell crispr screens. a, scatterplot of the relative target expression per gene comparing crispri knockdown with a single sgrna (expressed from a dual-guide vector paired with a nontargeting control) versus multiplexed sgrnas. multiplexed sgrnas significantly improve knockdown (sgrnas 1+control median relative target expression, 0.20; sgrnas 1+2 median relative target expression, 0.11; wilcoxon signed-rank two-sided test n=87 genes, w=378, p=8×10−11). sgrna 1, best predicted sgrna for each gene. sgrna 2, second best predicted sgrna for each gene. b, box plots of the relative target expression per gene in the multiplexed crispri experiment denoting quartile ranges (box), median (center mark) and 1.5× interquartile range (whiskers). ‘min(1,2)’ indicates the minimum remaining target expression between sgrna 1 (paired with negative control) and sgrna 2 (paired with negative control); that is, the predicted multiplexed sgrna knockdown based on a dominant model of knockdown. the multiplexed sgrnas performed better than the dominant model (wilcoxon signed-rank two-sided test n=87 genes, w=698, p=3×10−7). c, the fraction of total umis for l1000 genes (n=978) versus other genes from k562 cells, before and after target enrichment. d, scatterplot of the total number of umis for each gene, before and after target enrichment (n=978 genes). the pearson correlation of log10 normalized umis is r=0.98. e, heatmap depicts clustering of guides in our multiplexed crispri experiment. heatmap represents spearman’s rank correlations between pseudo-bulk expression profiles of well-expressed genes (>1 umis per cell). data from all perturbations with more than ten differentially expressed genes compared to controls are included (n=145 genes). the upper triangle (correlation matrix) was calculated on the whole transcriptome while the lower triangle (correlation matrix) was calculated on the target-enriched transcriptome. both triangles were identically ordered based on hierarchical clustering of the whole transcriptome correlation matrix. f, pearson correlations of pseudo-bulk differential expression profiles of well-expressed genes (>1 umis per cell) caused by sgrnas targeting the same gene (for n=39 genes whose knockdown led to differential gene expression) versus sgrnas targeting different genes (n=111,592 pairs). sgrnas targeting the same gene had significantly more similar profiles than sgrnas targeting different genes, both before and after target enrichment (unenriched median r=0.64, mann–whitney u two-sided test u=117,224, p=1.4×10−24; enriched median r=0.72, mann–whitney u two-sided test u=259,898, p=1.7×10−21). box plots denote quartile ranges (box), median (center mark) and 1.5× interquartile range (whiskers). g, schematic overview of direct-capture perturb-seq workflow.']. Reference sentences:[moreover indicative of robust assignment we found strong (and comparable) target depletion across platforms (median knock- down: 90% for gbc capture 94% for 3′ sgrna-cr1cs1 capture 93% for 3′ sgrna-cr1cs2 capture 95% for 5′ sgrna-cr1 capture and 93% for 5′ sgrna-cr1cs1 capture) (supplementary fig 3a).next we evaluated transcriptional responses and found good agreement across platforms (for the top 100 differentially expressed genes r = 0.88 for 3′ sgrna-cr1cs1 cap- ture compared to gbc perturb-seq and r = 0.87 for 5′ sgrna-cr1 capture compared to gbc perturb-seq) with especially high corre- lations for perturbations that led to differential expression of >100 genes (supplementary fig 3bc).despite the intrinsic noise of scrna-seq data prediction accuracies were highly simi- lar across platforms (correlation with gbc perturb-seq: r = 0.91 for 3′ sgrna-cr1cs1 capture r = 0.90 for 5′ sgrna-cr1 capture) (supplementary fig 3d).for both crispri and crispra the multiplexed sgrnas nearly doubled crispr activity over what was achieved with the best single guide (crispri: sgrnas 1 + control median relative target expression 0.20; sgrnas 1 + 2 median relative target expression 0.11; wilcoxon signed-rank two-sided test n = 87 genes w = 378 p = 8 × 10−11; crispra: sgrnas 1 + control median fold- activation 2.9; sgrnas 1 + 2 median fold-activation 4.7; wilcoxon signed-rank two-sided test n = 49 genes w = 162 p = 7 × 10−6; fig 3ab and supplementary fig 6ab).hybridization capture increased the percentage of mrna molecules aligning to target genes by >14-fold from 6% in an unenriched control to 87% after target enrichment (fig 3c).enriched gene expression pro- files were highly correlated with unenriched profiles at the global (r = 0.98) single-cell (median r = 0.93) and single-gene (median r = 0.75) levels (fig 3d supplementary fig 7d–f and supplementary note 6) and perturbation-dependent differential gene expression was highly similar before and after enrichment (median r = 0.71; supplementary fig 7g).hybridization capture on our multiplexed crispri perturb- seq libraries revealed that l1000-targeted gene expression profiles can recapitulate relationships between genetic perturbations estab- lished by sequencing the entire transcriptome (cophenetic correla- tion r = 0.95; fig 3ef and supplementary fig 7h).here we described several improvements to perturb-seq that substantially expand the scale and flexibility of this technology (fig 3g and supplementary table 8).we generated pseudo-bulk rna-seq phenotypes for individual guides or guide pairs by averaging the normalized expression profiles of well-expressed genes—excluding genes with a mean expression <1 umi per cell (fig 1e and 3e) and <0.5 umi per cell (supplementary fig 3b) across all cells assigned that guide or guide pair (and excluding multiplets).]
Patterns related to correlation between gene expressions before and after target enrichment, as well as between different sgRNAs targeting the same gene, were analyzed.

Text 488
10.1038/s41587-020-0470-y
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 4a,b) and transcriptional phenotypes that were correlated for guides targeting the same gene (supplementary fig 4c,d). recently, we showed that gbc perturb-seq can be coupled with epistasis analysis to provide mechanistic insights into how genes interact17. however, gbc perturb-seq is not easily scalable.']. Reference sentences:[]
Summary: Patterns of correlated transcriptional phenotypes for guides targeting the same gene were shown, providing insights into gene interactions.

Text 489
10.1101/gad.332577.119
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 6. reduced ptf1a levels alter the balance of inhibitory and excitatory neurons in the dorsal spinal cord. (a,a′) immunocytochemistry for pax2 and bhlhb5 on p5 cervical spinal cords from superficial lamina i & ii show a reduced number of pax2/bhlhb5 neurons (yellow arrowheads) in ar-dnt1 mutants when compared with wt. quantification reports the number of marker+ cells per hemisection (a′). each data point represents a biological replicate (n), error bars indicate sem. student’s t-test was used to determine significant differences relative to wt. p-values are as indicated. (∗) p < 0.05; (∗∗) p < 0.01. scale bar, 50 µm. (b–d) umap visualization of the snrna-seq from p25 cervical spinal cords from ptf1acre/ar-dnt1;ai14 and ptf1acre/+;ai14 controls. (b) clusters identified by major cell type. (c) neurons were analyzed separately generating 31 clusters. annotations are from pairwise pearson correlation analysis between the data sets generated in this study and that of sathyamurthy et al. (2018). (di) dorsal inhibitory; (de) dorsal excitatory; (vi) ventral inhibitory; (ve) ventral excitatory; (mi) mid inhibitory; (me) mid excitatory; (vc) ventral cholinergic. (d) illustrates the separation of excitatory and inhibitory neuronal']. Reference sentences:[this analysis revealed a specif- ic loss of these neurons relative to wild-type controls (fig 6a).using 10x genomics we obtained sequence on 10889 and 9969 nuclei of each genotype respectively that passed quality control criteria of which 36% of each were identified as neurons (3875 and 3629) and the other nuclei were identified as other major spinal cord classes including as- trocytes oligodendrocytes and opcs (fig 6b; supple- mental fig s6a).we analyzed nuclei from the neurons only and identified 31 discrete clusters (fig 6c).2018) who performed snrna-seq on adult lumbar spinal cords (fig 6c; supplemental table s2).similar to this previous study we found that the inhibitory and excitatory neu- rons generate largely distinct clusters particularly in the dorsal spinal cord where neuronal populations are more discretely clustered than the ventral neuronal populations (fig 6d; supplemental fig 6b).to pinpoint neuronal subtypes specifically affected in ar-dnt1 mutants that could underlie the scratch phenotype we identified clusters that were either over- represented or underrepresented in the ar-dnt1 mutant cervical spinal cords relative to controls (fig 6e; sup- plemental table s2).2018) were overrepresented in the ar-dnt1 mutants relative to controls albeit the differ- ences here were more modest (fig 6e; supplemental ta- ble s2).e b a a′ c d figure 6.(2018) to annotate neurons astrocytes oligodendrocytes oligodendrocyte progenitor cells (opcs) and meningeal cells and annotated the clusters (fig 6b; supplemental fig s6a).]
Patterns of correlation between inhibitory and excitatory neurons in the dorsal spinal cord are shown, with distinct clustering of neuronal populations.

Text 490
10.1038/s41587-020-0469-4
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 3 | similarity measures of sc/snrna-seq methods. a,b, principal component analysis on down-sampled data (20,000) using highly variable genes between protocols, separated into hek293t cells, monocytes and b cells, and color coded by protocol (a) and number of detected genes per cell (b). c, pearson’s correlation plots across protocols using expression of common genes. for a fair comparison, cells were down-sampled to the same number for each method (b cells, n=32; monocytes, n=57; hek293t cells, n=55). protocols are ordered by agglomerative hierarchical clustering. d, average log(expression) values of cell-type-specific reference markers for down-sampled (20,000) hek293t cells, monocytes and b cells. e, log(expression) values of reference markers on down-sampled data (20,000) for hek293t cells, monocytes and b cells (maximum of 50 random cells per technique). f, cumulative gene counts per protocol as the average of 100 randomly sampled hek293t cells, monocytes and b cells, separately on down-sampled data (20,000).']. Reference sentences:[although the differentiated pbmcs clearly separated into subpopulations (for example t/b cells monocytes; fig 2b and see supplementary fig 3a and 4a–d) colon cells were ordered as a continuum of cell states that differ- entiate from intestinal stem cells into the main functional units of the colon (that is absorptive enterocytes and secretory cells; fig 2c and see supplementary fig 3b and 5a–d).to quantify the technical variation within and across protocols we selected highly variable genes (hvgs) across all datasets and plotted the variation in the main principal compo- nents (pcs; fig 3a).using the down-sampled data for hek293t cells monocytes and b cells we observed strong protocol-specific profiles with the main source of variability being the number of genes detected per cell (fig 3b).for the three human cell types we observed a broad spectrum of correlation across technologies with generally lower correlation for smaller cell types (fig 3c).although the transcriptome represen- tation was generally conserved (fig 3a) the snrna-seq protocol resulted in a notable outlier when correlating the expression levels of common genes across protocols possibly driven by decreased cor- relation of immature transcripts.specifically population markers were detected with different accuracies (see supplementary fig 17 and 18) and the detection level varied substantially (fig 3de and see supplementary table 4).the protocols also detected vastly different total numbers of genes when accumulating transcript information over multiple cells with strong positive outliers observed for the smaller cell types (fig 3f).omitting the cell integration step before visualizing the datasets together in a single tsne/umap resulted in a protocol-specific distribution with cell types scattered to multiple clusters (see supplementary fig 30).notably the choice of protocol to create the reference dataset (chromium) for initial cell annotation had no impact on the outcome of the present study (see supplementary fig 31).]
Patterns of correlation between different single-cell transcriptomics protocols, influenced by the number of detected genes per cell and cell type size.

Text 491
10.1016/j.celrep.2020.03.034
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 3. changes in folding patterns correlate with alterations in gene expression (a) pc1 comparison between naive b cells and plasma cells overlaying rna-seq expression. each spot represents a gene. pc1 values are calculated as the average pc1 of the 50-kb bins overlapping with the gene. rna-seq change was calculated as the fold tpm change of the genes in plasma cells and naive b cells. a 5-fold tpm increase is marked as upregulated (red), and a 5-fold decrease is marked as downregulated (blue); otherwise, unchanged (gray). (b) change in pc1 values as it relates to the correlation difference (corrdiff). each line represents the distribution of pc1 differences between plasma cell and naive b of the regions satisfying the criteria indicated. for example, ‘‘top 1%’’ denotes the regions with the top 1% lowest (most dissimilar) corrdiff values. all background means all regions in the genome were considered.']. Reference sentences:[plasma cell differentiation is concurrent with the repositioning of regulatory elements to examine how changes in compartmentalization relate to changes in gene expression we plotted pc1 values of transcrip- tion start sites (tsss) in naive b versus plasma cells and rna abundance (figure 3a).next we segregated genomic regions based on the cor- relation of hic-derived interaction patterns between follicular b and plasma cells (figure 3b).notably we found that during the transition from the follicular b to plasma cell fate a selected group of genes including atf4 ell2 and prdm1 gained euchromatic strength (figure 3e).the alterations in compartmentalization were closely associated with large-scale changes in chromatin folding across the atf4 ell2 and prdm1 loci (figure 3e).cell reports 31 107470 april 7 2020 5 figure 3.]
Summary: Changes in compartmentalization patterns correlate with alterations in gene expression, as shown by pc1 values and correlation differences between naive B cells and plasma cells.

Text 492
10.1016/j.celrep.2020.03.063
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 3. multi-omic targeted transcriptomics identifies canonical memory t cell populations and allows the study of rare-antigenspecific cd8+ t cells (a) umap plots calculated as indicated and colored by donor (left) or by cartridge run (right) show that there are no major clusters driven from the different experimental runs or individual donors. (b) example umap plots (calculated on transcript) representing the expression of the main immune lineage protein markers, which allow the unequivocal identification of cd4+ and cd8+ t cells, cd19+ b cells, and cd14+, as well as cd16+ myeloid cells. (c) example bivariate plots showing the poor correlation of transcript and protein levels for cd4 and cd69 and good correlation for cd8 and cd27. protein signal is plotted on the y-axis, and transcript signal on the x-axis.']. Reference sentences:[we found that cells from different donors comingled and separated by cell type rather than by donor suggesting that there was no cluster driven by a single donor (figure 3a left panel).also the two experimental batches (cartridges) did not show significant separation on a umap plot calculated using transcripts or proteins (figure 3a right panel).cell reports 31 107499 april 7 2020 5 figure 3.(legend continued on next page) 6 cell reports 31 107499 april 7 2020 immune clusters (figure 3b) which is not necessarily the case when using transcript information for the corresponding lineage markers.this is exemplified by biaxial plots showing protein signal on the y-axis and transcript signal on the x-axis (figure 3c).for cd27 we observed a higher correlation between transcripts and proteins (figure 3c).unbiased graph-based clustering using transcript information suggested the presence of 5 distinct cellular clusters (figure 3d).visualization of the top differentially expressed genes such as sell (encoding cd62l) ccr7 and gzmb suggested that these 5 clusters reﬂect canonical naive and memory t cell pop- ulations (sallusto et al. 1999; figure 3e).we confirmed the resemblance of these populations by surface protein expression (figure 3f) with central memory cd8+ t cells expressing low levels of cd45ra protein and high levels of both cd27 and cd28 protein (sallusto et al. 2004; hamann et al. 1997).this approach allows easy identification of cellular clusters that are similar by transcripts but separated by proteins and vice versa (figure 3g).one example for this is highlighted in figure 3g (red box and arrow) where cluster 2 (light green temra cells) is relatively homogeneous by transcript but can be separated by cd56 protein expression.a fraction of cells between cluster 1 (dark blue effector memory cd8+ t cells) and 2 (light green temra) shares the same protein signature but can be distin- guished by gnly and gzmh expression (figure 3g red box and arrows).visualization on the umap plot revealed remarkable similarity of ebv-specific t cells across all three donors (figure 3h) with most of the cells grouped within the effector memory cd8+ t cell cluster.]
Summary: Poor correlation between transcript and protein levels for some markers, good correlation for others, highlighting discrepancies in single-cell data integration.

Text 493
10.1016/j.stemcr.2020.04.002
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 3. sema3d, wt1, tcf21, tbx18, and scx are co-expressed throughout the epicardial layer (a) ish of e11.5 hearts shows tdtom labeling of the epicardium (epi), induced at e9.5 in wt1creert2 embryos (n = 4 hearts). inset shows cells in atrioventricular groove (avg) co-expressing tcf21 and tdtom, and downregulated wt1 (arrow). (b–f) ish of e11.5 hearts for (b) sema3d, (c) wt1, (d) tcf21, (e) tbx18, and (f) scx with tdtom-labeled epicardium (insets) (n = 3 hearts). (g) immunostaining of e11.5 heart cryosections for sema3d and wt1 reveals expression of sema3d and wt1 throughout the epicardial layer, marked by tdtom (n = 3). (h) strategy used to gate tdtom+ cells in ﬂow cytometric analysis of e11.5 hearts. cardiomyocytes and endothelial cells were excluded based on expression of cardiac troponin t (ctnt) and cd31, respectively. (i) correlation between wt1 transcript and wt1 protein levels (94% overlap) (n = 21 hearts; 3 independent experiments). correlation between wt1 expression and tdtomato labeling efficiency (89%) (n = 8 hearts; 2 independent experiments).']. Reference sentences:[some markers were detected in non-epicardial domains tbx18 in cms (figure 3e) scx and tcf21 in avcu (figures 3d–3f) confirming previous reports (acharya et al. 2011; barnette et al. 2014; christof- fels et al. 2009).to confirm corre- lation between wt1 mrna and wt1 protein levels and to quantify overlap at the single (whole)-cell level a ﬂow cy- tometry-based rna in situ hybridization method was uti- lized (primeflow rna assay) on enzymatically dissociated e11.5 hearts (figure 3h).of all cells labeled by wt1 probe and/or wt1 antibody 94% were strongly positive for both (figure 3i).to assess tdtom labeling efficiency and to exclude the possibility that slight variations in wt1 expression might inﬂuence recombination we analyzed overlap of both wt1 and wt1 expression with tdtom which revealed 88.5% of wt1+ cells (figure s3d) and 89.1% of wt1+ cells to be tdtom labeled (figure 3i); considered highly efficient for an inducible cre line (haya- shi and mcmahon 2002).co-expression of wt1 tcf21 sema3d and tbx18 was detected in >95% of tdtom+ cells (figure 3j) confirming the rnascope results.scx expression was very low and detected only in 88.7% (figure 3j).14 j 770–787 j may 12 2020 a b c d e f g h i j figure 3.]
Co-expression patterns of multiple markers in epicardial layer cells, with high correlation between gene expression and protein levels.

Text 494
10.1186/s13059-020-02006-2
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 2 accurate computational correction of cellular signatures based on spike-in cells. a mouse spike-ins are used to estimate the fraction of contamination fc and the signature of contamination sc. b predicted versus measured fc. c, d pearson correlation of raw (black) and corrected (red) values of the spike-ins in the human and mouse samples to the external reference spike-in transcriptome. e flow diagram of data correction of dmso samples from donors i and ii. left to right: 1—scatter plot of raw ins and gcg from human donors i and ii. 2 and 3—density plots of donors separately of raw and corrected data. 4—scatter plot of corrected ins and gcg from human donors i and ii. p < 0.0001, p < 0.001, p < 0.005']. Reference sentences:[based on the above rationale we devised a computational decontamination procedure based on spike-in cells to correct expression data of all cells (fig 2a).this assessment showed high prediction performance (fig 2b r = 0.72).this evaluation was done in cross-validated mouse as well as human data unseen by the predictor (fig 2c).similar high performance was observed when decontaminating mouse cells based on human spike-ins (fig 2d).altogether these analyses demonstrate that cellular spike-in controls not only are powerful tools to detect sample contamination with cell-free rna but also enable highly accurate correction of contaminated data (fig 2e).after decontamination we noticed that one human sample (gaba in donor ii) captured a large portion of total cells (21978 of 164143 human cells) but had very low quality (fig s4f) and higher contamination after correction (fig 2c).significance values for correlation of corrected and raw data to reference spike-ins as shown in fig 2c fig 2d and additional file 1: figure s3b.]
Patterns related to correlation between raw and corrected values of spike-ins in human and mouse samples were analyzed for accurate computational correction of cellular signatures.

Text 495
10.1186/s13059-020-02006-2
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 6 artemether effects on beta cells are species dependent. a spearman correlations of log fold changes of comparisons of 1 μm foxoi, 10 μm artemether, or 100 μm gaba to dmso for alpha and beta cells from mouse and human islets. b foxoi induces dedifferentiation of alpha and beta cells in mouse and human, while artemether increases the fraction of ins+ alpha cells. in beta cells, artemether effects are species dependent; in mouse, the drug induces beta cell dedifferentiation, while in human there are no strong effects']. Reference sentences:[correlating the transcription changes between individual samples further supports the finding that these drugs exert different effects in mouse and human islet cells (fig 6).here we show that the effect can be phenocopied by a pharmacological inhibitor and is conserved in both mouse and human islets (fig 6b).genome biology (2020) 21:106 page 13 of 22 (fig 6b).in human samples however these drugs formed a clearly separated clus- ter and did not cause downregulation of insulin (fig 6b).differential gene expression in all cell types and treatments in mouse and human as shown in fig 4abc fig 5a d e and fig 6a.]
Summary: Correlation of drug effects on species-specific cell types in single-cell transcriptomics.

Text 496
10.1038/s41586-020-2266-0
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 1 | developmental diversification of hypothalamic cell lineages. a, umap plot of 51,199 cells of ectodermal origin, integrated by canonical correlation analysis (cca) to achieve a hypothetical continuum that reflects the progressive attainment of cell identities. walktrap in igraph distinguished non-mature cells (clusters 11, 19) and neurons (31 proto-groups) at the end of each developmental trajectory. b, schemes illustrating the conformity of alignment and clustering in pseudotime (z-axis, calculated independently, top) and biological age (bottom). c, umap on paga representation of progenitors, glia and immature neurons (bridge cells). rna velocity12,13 transformed']. Reference sentences:[overall proto-groups of progenitors (2) tanycytes (2) astroependymal cells (2) immature oligodendrocytes (3) cells of the pars tuberalis (3) and neurons (33; fig 1a) reflecting diversity in the adult hypothalamus489 were specified by differentially expressed tfs (extended data fig 1) during development (fig 1b).semi-supervised analysis of 327 genes for enrichment high- lighted that the progression of bridge cells relied on the dominance of genes related to the regulation of pluripotency (sox2) neural stem cell differentiation (hes1 ascl1 rbpj dll1 and dll3 for notch signalling)1415 erk signalling (sox11) neuronal migration (dlx1 dlx2 dlx5 dlx6; subsequently referred to as dlx1/2/5/6) and morphogenesis (rbfox3; fig 1d)1617.the proposed waves of neurogenesis by self-renewing pro- genitors and early neuroblasts that ubiquitously express ascl1 along the third ventricle (fig 1d) were shown in ascl1-creert2::ai14 mice at e18.5 with recombination induced during the e12.5–e16.5 period (fig 1e) and validated in ascl1−/− mice presenting a restricted cohort of sox2+ immature precursors (extended data fig 2f).tdtomato+ progenies in the many hypothalamic subregions confirmed neurogenesis dur- ing mid-gestation with a gradual decline after e16.5 (fig 1e extended data fig 2d).in support of postnatal neurogenesis sox2+ precursors persisted in the wall of the third ventricle and generated progenies that progressed through ascl1+ and rbfox3+ (neun) stages (fig 1f extended data fig 2g h).intermediate states for gaba neurons within our integrated dataset about 47% of all cells committed to the neuronal lineage were in immature states (clusters 11 19; fig 1a 2a) before progressing towards final differentiation as suggested by the expression of homeobox genes that are thought to determine gaba identities (cluster 11 foxg1 and nkx2-3; number 19 sox2 sox11 gsx1 gsx2 e2f1 arx and pbx3; extended data fig 1).cluster 11 is composed of immature neurons that are largely homogeneous with low-level differential gene expression but express rate-limiting enzymes and transporters for gaba neurotransmission (extended data fig 1a 3a).a cellular clusters from fig 1a (without clusters 38 42 45 and oligodendrocytes) represented as a graph-like map upon transforming umap embedding with the paga method12 to assess cell differentiation trajectories.a a dendrogram of regulons for each cell cluster estimated in fig 1b.we applied a supervised approach that sampled stationary states (genes that are spatially restricted in both pre- and postnatal brains; fig 1d extended data fig 1) and integrated stages of fate transition and branching-off of differentiated neurons.early-expressed glial genes (hes1 fabp7 slc1a3 vim) marked progeni- tors (cells expressing for example sox2 dll1/3) in the innermost (‘ven- tricular’) zone of the third ventricle at e14.5–e15.5 (fig 1c extended data fig 7a b).committed progeny then unidirectionally distanced them- selves laterally (extended data fig 2d–g) and expressed protogenes for neuronal migration (dlx1/2/5/6 rbfox3; fig 1d).our hypothesis was corroborated by the approximately 90% co-expression of th and gad1 in immature neurons (fig 4d e extended data fig 9e) including in (bac)gad65–egfp and gad67–gfp mice (extended data fig 10a).to identify genes that promote gaba-to-dopamine phenotypic transitions we screened hypothalamic regulons for th as target and found that the expression patterns of master genes for the meis2 nfe2l1 dlx1 and pbx3 regulons cover the broad initiation of th expression at embryonic time points (extended data fig 10b).histochemistry specifi- cally tied the co-existence of onecut2/onecut3 and sncg pmfbp1a and nr4a2 to pevn dopamine neurons (fig 4g extended data fig 10c d).to further resolve the segregation of a14 neurons we identified substantial sst expression prenatally (with a gradual decay after birth) in onecut3+ dopamine neurons (fig 4h extended data fig 10e).10x genomics data pre-processing data derived at each time point were processed independently (sup- plementary fig 1 supplementary note).and learned umap embedding5767 (fig 1a extended data fig 3a7a d e supplementary note).for this reason we used clustering factors from the integration manifold by all field prevalent algorithms (graph-based algorithms mostly from the igraph package used in pagoda2 with default parameters on 37 pcs and separately on the corrected umi counts matrix and a small local movement algorithm with different resolutions via seurat’s findclus- ters function) for comparison (supplementary fig 10 supplementary note).we annotated the final 45 clusters by deg testing with mast52 (fig 1a 2a and extended data fig 1) on the sctransform-corrected651 log-normalized umi matrix (data slot in a seurat object).we used dendrograms to order our dot plots (extended data fig 1).next we used abstraction graph nodes as starting points for the umap algorithm with maxiter = 1000 nega- tive_sample_rate = 20 min_dist = 1 spread = 2 parameters to prepare embedding corresponding to cell lineage relations (fig 1b–d 2a b 3f 4a supplementary fig 11 supplementary note).finally we allocated root cells by using the backward markov process on the transition probability matrix to define excessive density area estimated the latent time on a learned transcription dynamic model and plotted a velocity grid and individual cell velocities embedded in umap space (fig 1c).for this purpose we used a probabilistic approach palantir93 which we implemented as an external module to the scanpy python package81 (fig 1d 4b extended data fig 7a supplementary fig 12 in supplementary note).similarly we applied this method to the pomc cell group (fig 2b) and every distinct th containing group (fig 4b–d f h i extended data fig 9c supple- mentary fig 13 in supplementary note) guided by paga topology.for fig 1a a umap plot was built for n = 51199 cells of ectodermal origin integrated by canonical correlation analysis (cca).for fig 1c n = 5070 cells were used for umap.for fig 1d (right) we sampled cell-ordering (n = 5070 cells) to 500 bins to compute gene expression trends.for fig 1e n = 2 animals for e12.5 3 n = animals for e13.5 and n = 3 animals for e15.5 were used for embryonal tracing of ascl1 at corresponding time points.for fig 1f n = 2 animals were used to trace ascl1+ cells in (bac)gad65–egfp:ascl1-creert2::ai14 mice (tamox- ifen injection at p14 sample collection at p21).for extended data fig 1 we used the dataset of n = 51199 ectodermal cells for dot-plot representation (extended data fig 1a b) and umap visualizations (extended data fig 1b c).for extended data fig 10a images are representative for the experiment performed in duplicate on n = 4 for each developmental stage of both mouse lines.for extended data fig 10b n = 26316 cells from the neuronal lineage (including progenitors) were used.for extended data fig 10c n = 3 ani- mals were tested for each developmental time-point.for extended data fig 10d n = 2 animals were tested for each independent experiment.for extended data fig 10e n = 2 animals were tested for the exper iment.for extended data fig 10f n = 9 onecut3+ neurons were recon- structed.extended data fig 1 | marker genes to define molecular phenotypes.colour coding and numbering at the top correspond to those in fig 1a.colour codes correspond to those in fig 1a.colour codes are consistent with those in fig 1a.h genetic tracing of ascl+ cells postnatally (as in fig 1f).extended data fig 10 | see next page for caption.article extended data fig 10 | gaba origin of hypothalamic dopamine neurons.therefore inferences on developmental trajectories were performed in an unsupervised manner as illustrated by figure 1b.]
Summary: Correlation patterns in hypothalamic cell lineages were identified through gene expression changes during development, highlighting diverse cell identities and differentiation trajectories.

Text 497
10.1016/j.devcel.2020.04.009
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 1. single-cell rna-seq profiling of the developing human retina (a) schematic of experimental design. (b and c) 3d umap embedding of the retina dataset, with individual cells colored by (b) age and (c) annotated cell types. (d and e) spearman correlation between the transcriptomes of (d) human samples, or (e) across human and mouse retinal samples. (f) normalized specification windows of retinal cell types. (g) heatmap showing relative expression of transcripts with high specificity to individual cell types, ordered by cell type and developmental age (top annotation bars). (h–m) immunohistochemistry on primary human retinal tissue validating the dynamic expression of cell-type markers, including (h) s-opsin (short wavelength cones); (i) l/m-opsin (long/medium wavelength cones); (j) rho (rods); (k) prkca and vsx2 (bipolar cells); (l) brn3a (rgcs) and calretinin (horizontal,']. Reference sentences:[replicate samples and samples from similar ages (i.e. gw9 and gw11) display high concordance in average gene expression across samples (figure 1d).to identify specification windows for individual cell types we examined the cell type proportions by age within proximal clusters to neurogenic or precursor cell populations (see star methods; figure 1f).other examples of cone-enriched genes in humans that show different patterns of expression in mouse include dct which is restricted to the retinal pigmented epithelium in mouse and hotairm1 which is not detectably expressed in mouse retina (figure 1g).unlike the m€uller glia-specific expression pattern seen in mice (blackshaw et al. 2004; reichenbach and bringmann 2013) both clu and vim are expressed in primary rpcs at all stages of neurogenesis (figure 1g).human and mouse sample relatedness (figure 1e) as above average gene expression was determined across each sample normalized for read depth within individual cells.human/mouse sample correlations were performed using pairwise spearman correla- tions with sample gene expression correlations plotted in the heatmap in figure 1e.cell type specification windows related to figure 1f - specification windows were determined by analyzing the proportions of definitively called cell types within clusters proximal to rpc neurogenic or precursor cell populations.]
Patterns of correlation in gene expression between human samples and across human and mouse retinal samples.

Text 498
10.1038/s41598-020-64929-x
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 5. predicted developmental state is inversely correlated with ribosomal protein expression in call cells and is a major source of intra-individual transcriptional heterogeneity. (a) left: umap representation of the maturation spectrum of healthy pediatric and adult b cells (cd34+→b cells → cd20+b cells) used for the b cell developmental state classifier. right: umap representation of the maturation spectrum of healthy pediatric and adult t cells (cd34+→immature hematopoietic → t cells) used for the t cell developmental state classifier. cells were projected onto the loess fit of the spectrum and assigned a pseudotime value of 0 to 1 from the first stem-like cell to the last mature cell. (b) observed vs predicted pseudotime of healthy b and t cells using a hundred 70/30 cross-validation splits; mean rmse was computed over all splits. (c) density of predicted developmental state pseudotime distributions of leukemia cells per sample and intra-individual transcriptional cluster. (d) boxplot of ribosomal protein (rp) expression percentage in leukemia cells per sample and intraindividual transcriptional cluster. (e) pseudotime vs ribosomal protein expression in samples showing strong (hhd.1) vs weak (etv6.runx1.2) intra-individual pseudotime and ribosomal protein expression shifts. (f) heatmap of normalized and scaled expression of ribosomal protein genes per cell sorted from high to low. an expression gradient correlated to cluster assignment can be observed in sample hhd.1 but not etv6.runx1.2.']. Reference sentences:[]
Summary: Correlation between developmental state pseudotime and ribosomal protein expression in leukemia cells, influencing intra-individual transcriptional heterogeneity.

Text 499
10.1016/j.devcel.2020.05.010
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 4. three-species comparison of gene expression dynamics across the germ cell differentiation trajectory (a) pseudotime heterochrony between pairs of species, shown as correlation matrices between 200 ordered centroids in each species, defined from initial pseudotime assignments in each species. sc, spermatocyte. elong, elongating spermatid.']. Reference sentences:[however when 200 biological steps are defined separately for each species heterochrony is observed (figure 4a) i.e. pseudotime proceeds at different rates (star methods).as expected the 20 centroids show synchrony after reassigning cells to the universal time indicating proper align- ment (figure 4c).with analogous states properly matched we compared cell occupancy across the germ cell differentiation states: gc1–20 (mouse and human) or gc1–21 (macaque) along with the spg states: spg1–6 (star methods; figure 4d).using conserved markers (figure 4e) we mapped these states to major spermato- genesis processes: mitosis (spg1–6) meiosis (gc1–4) and spermiogenesis (gc5–14 round spermatids and gc15–20/21 elongating spermatids).humans and macaques have a large pool of undifferentiated spg (spg1–2; figure 4c) that undergo a limited number of transit-amplifying divisions whereas mice have fewer such cells which undergo more mitotic divisions (see spg section).we performed pca for the merged centroids datasets (201x3=603 centroids) using 247 genes which is the intersection of the 2000 highly variable genes for each species initially selected by monocle(figure 4b).however heterochrony occurs between species as deviations from the diagonal are observed(figure 4a) suggesting that the biological steps defined separately for each species - using the current stan- dard method - proceed at different rates even when the comparison is based on the same set of 247 genes.]
Patterns of correlation in gene expression dynamics across germ cell differentiation trajectories in different species, indicating heterochrony in pseudotime progression rates.

Text 500
10.1016/j.devcel.2020.05.010
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 6. somatic cells show divergence of transcriptome and signaling relationships (a) expression of a representative marker for each of the seven somatic cell types for human (top) and macaque (bottom). (b) schematic of somatic cell localization patterns in primate testis. (c) hematoxylin and eosin staining of human, macaque, and mouse seminiferous tubules. arrowheads indicate peritubular myoid cell nuclei; red dotted lines indicate layers of myoid cells. (d) cross-species comparison of somatic transcriptome by a joint principal component analysis (pca) of cell type centroids from all three species, using 673 1-1-1 ortholog genes that are highly variable in each species. symbol shape represents the species. symbol color represents the cell type. ellipsoids group cell types with similar transcriptome across species. elliptic lines depict 50% confidence interval for cell types observed across species. (e) cross-species comparison of somatic cell types using rank correlation of gene expression centroids for seven human, seven macaque, and six mouse cell types. correlations are calculated using two gene sets: 673 orthologs described in figure 6d (upper right triangle) or 311 1-1-1 ortholog genes encoding signaling ligands (lower left triangle). see also figure s6; table s6.']. Reference sentences:[this overrepresenta- tion of myoid cells in primates reﬂects structural difference in seminiferous tubule basement membrane with multiple layers of myoid cells in human and macaque but a single layer in mouse (reviewed in maekawa et al. 1996) (figure 6c).to globally compare somatic cells to uncover the changes over the course of mammalian evolution we merged the somatic cells from all three species performed principal component analysis (figure 6d) and compared cell type centroids (fig- ure 6e) using 1-1-1 orthologs (star methods).in the pc1– pc2 plot immune cell populations separated from the remaining somatic cells confirming that the distinction between cell types overshadows species differences (figure 6d).while endothelial and macrophage cell transcriptional programs appeared to be largely conserved (r = 0.6–0.8; figure 6e upper half of matrix) there are notable between-species differences in the remaining somatic cells.similar cellular association and correlation patterns were confirmed using several gene sets (figure s6e; star methods) including ligand expression (figure 6e lower half of matrix) indicating that the observed shifts in cell identity relationships are likely due to genuine pro- grammatic changes in the transcriptome.in figure 6b each of the gene cluster consists of both genes that are highly variable in both species and those that are highly variable in one species but not highly variable in the other but do have an expression pattern that have a high correlation (>0.8) with one of the 6 clusters centroid.in addition we performed pca for all centroids in three species using intersect of hvg (figure 6d).]
Patterns of correlation in gene expression centroids across different somatic cell types in human, macaque, and mouse.

Text 501
10.1038/s41591-020-0944-y
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 2 | robust hla class ii downregulation and type i interferon-driven inflammatory signatures in monocytes are characteristics of sars-cov-2 infection. a, umap embedding of all monocytes colored by sample of origin. n=10,339 cells are plotted from n=14 biologically independent samples. b, umap embedding of monocytes colored by cd14 and fcgr3a (encoding cd16a, to distinguish between cd14+ and cd16+ monocytes), hla-dpb1 and hla-dma (illustrating hla class ii downregulation in patients with covid-19) and s100a9 and ifi27 (demonstrating canonical inflammatory signatures in patients with covid-19). c, umap embedding of monocytes colored by genes encoding pro-inflammatory cytokines previously reported to be produced by circulating monocytes in severe covid-196, namely tnf, il6, il1b, ccl3, ccl4 and cxcl2. d,g,h, heatmaps of de genes (d), differentially regulated canonical pathways (g) and differentially regulated predicted upstream regulators (h) between cd14+ monocytes of each covid-19 sample compared to cd14+ monocytes of all healthy controls. the heatmap in d is colored by average log(fold-change), while heatmaps in g and h are colored by z-score. all displayed genes, pathways and regulators are statistically significant at the p<0.05 confidence level by seurat’s implementation of the wilcoxon rank-sum test (two-sided, adjusted for multiple comparisons using bonferroni’s correction, in d) or ingenuity pathway analysis (ipa) implementation of the fisher exact test (right-tailed, in g and h). the 50 genes (d), 25 pathways (g) or 50 regulators (h) with the highest absolute average log(fold-change) or z-score across all donors are labeled. genes with a net positive average log(fold-change) or z-score are labeled in red; genes with a net negative average log(fold-change) or z-score are labeled in blue. dps, days post-symptom onset; dtf, days from first reported or measured fever. e, boxplot showing the mean hla class ii module score of cd14+ monocytes from each sample, colored by healthy donors (blue), non-ventilated patients with covid-19 (orange) or ventilated patients with covid-19 (red). shown are exact p values by two-sided wilcoxon rank-sum test. n=6, n=4 and n=4 biologically independent samples for healthy, nonvent and ards, respectively. f, dot plot depicting percent expression and average expression of all detected hla genes in cd14+ monocytes by donor. i, boxplot showing the ifna module score of each cell, colored by healthy donors (blue), non-ventilated patients with covid-19 (orange) or ventilated patients with covid-19 (red). j, scatter plots depicting the correlation between the mean isg module score of cd14+ monocytes in each sample and the patient age (top) and time–distance from first measured or reported fever (bottom). shown are pearson’s r, exact two-sided p values and the 95% confidence interval. n=8 (top) and n=6 (bottom) independent biological samples. number of cells for d,f–i: c1 a, 1,561; c1 b, 1,858; c2, 217; c3, 1,102; c4, 713; c5, 462; c6, 277; c7, 2,095; h1, 680; h2, 325; h3, 215; h4, 166; h5, 444; h6, 224. for d,g–h, cells from all healthy controls (n=2,054 cells) are used to generate comparisons with each covid-19 sample. for e,i, boxplot features: minimum whisker, 25th percentile−1.5×iqr or the lowest value within; minimum box, 25th percentile; center, median; maximum box, 75th percentile; maximum whisker, 75th percentile+1.5×iqr or greatest value within.']. Reference sentences:[these trends were not explained by the time post-fever or post-symptom onset (extended data fig 2).dimensionality reduction of monocytes alone indicated a strong phenotypic shift in cd14+ monocytes and a depletion of cd16+ monocytes (fig 2ab).notably we did not identify substantial expression of pro-inflammatory cytokine genes tnf il6 il1b ccl3 ccl4 or cxcl2 by peripheral monocytes (fig 2c) suggesting that periph- eral monocytes do not contribute to the putative cytokine storm in covid-19.eight genes encoding hla class ii molecules were downregulated in at least six covid-19 samples relative to healthy controls (fig 2d) concordant with other studies1920.scoring of individual cells by expression of all hla class ii-encoding genes revealed that this downregulation was significant in all patients with covid-19 but potentially more prominent in ventilation-dependent patients (fig 2ef and supplementary table 25).hla class ii downregulation is reflected in differentially regulated gene pathways including reduction of crosstalk between dendritic cells and natural killer cells (fig 2g and supplementary table 11).non-classical hla class i genes hla-e and hla-f were also down- regulated to a lesser degree and in fewer samples while canonical hla class i genes hla-a hla-b and hla-c were not consistently up- or downregulated (fig 2f).additionally 32 interferon (ifn)-stimulated genes (isgs) were upregulated by cd14+ monocytes in at least one covid-19 sam- ple but this ifn signature was not uniform across all covid-19 samples (fig 2d and supplementary table 4).analysis of upstream regulators in cd14+ monocytes revealed an absence of predicted ifn and ifn regulatory factor (irf) activities in donors c2 c3 and c7 relative to the remaining covid-19 donors (fig 2h).to analyze this orthogonally we scored individual cd14+ monocytes in the dataset by their expression of known isgs and again saw minimal appreciable isg signatures in donors c2 c3 and c7 (fig 2i and supplementary table 25).the differential isg signature was not explained by ventilation or ards (fig 2hi) but a higher isg score trended towards a positive correlation with age and a negative cor- relation with time–distance from fever onset (fig 2j).as in fig 2 f is colored by average log(fold-change) while g is colored by z-score.]
Correlation between ISG module score of monocytes and patient age or time from fever onset in COVID-19.

Text 502
10.1016/j.cell.2020.05.039
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure s2. keratinocyte annotation and subpopulation analysis, related to figure 2 (a) umap of all epithelial cell clusters (k = 29,143) with labeled cycling, eccrine cell, and pilosebaceous clusters. (b) umap of all epithelial cells labeled by tissue type and patient. (c) umap feature plots of expression of genes marking cycling, eccrine, or pilosebaceous clusters. (d) umaps of filtered normal and tumor keratinocytes labeled by patient before and after batch correction. cca = canonical correlation analysis. (e) bar plots showing proportion of each subpopulation across normal and tumor keratinocytes. (f) violin plots of differentiation signature score (n = 387 genes, lopez-pajares et al., 2015) in normal and tumor keratinocyte subpopulations. p values were determined with pairwise wilcoxon rank sum tests with benjamini-hochberg correction for multiple comparisons. (g) clustered heatmap of all recovered transcription factor (tf) regulons from scenic analysis (n = 370 regulons) across tumor keratinocyte subpopulations. for visualization purposes, 100 random cells from each subpopulation are shown in the heatmap. (h) cell cycle regression analysis with re-clustering into basal, differentiating, and tsk subpopulations with umap feature plots showing marker gene expression after cell cycle regression.']. Reference sentences:[]
Summary: Patterns of correlation between different subpopulations of epithelial cells based on gene expression and transcription factor regulons.

Text 503
10.1016/j.devcel.2020.06.009
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 3. unbiased hierarchal analyses confirm distinct transcriptional signatures among pia, arachnoid, and dura fibroblasts (a) umap annotated with 14 subclusters identified by analysis of principal clusters m1–m4. percentage of cells per subcluster relative to the principal cluster is indicated in the legend. (b) non-negative matrix factorization (nmf) matrix and linkage tree or cladogram showing hierarchical relationships among m1–m4 subclusters. cophenetic correlation is maximized for k = 4. colors represent correlation values based on consensus clustering that range from 0 (blue, samples are never in the same cluster) to 1 (red, samples are always in the same cluster). cladogram branches are annotated to indicate ‘‘pia’’ (red), ‘‘arachnoid’’ (green), and ‘‘dura’’ (blue) populations. asterisks indicate subclusters that are transcriptionally distinct from other subclusters in the ‘‘pia’’ (red asterisk), ‘‘arachnoid’’ (green), and ‘‘dura’’ (blue) clades. (c) dot plot depicting genes enriched in pia, arachnoid, and dura subclusters. dot color represents average expression level, and size represents the percentage of cells expressing each marker.']. Reference sentences:[the subclustering analysis divided the 4 principle clusters into 14 subclusters (2 m1 6 m2 4 m3 and 2 m4 subclusters) (figure 3a legend includes per- centage of cells in each subcluster; figures s3a–s3d).the hierarchical analysis segregated the meningeal subclusters into three main branches that correspond with our pial arach- noid and dura classifications (figure 3b).(legend continued on next page) ll resource 46 developmental cell 54 43–59 july 6 2020 respectively) while the pia clade has two transcriptionally distinct outlier subclusters (m2-3 and m2-6) (red figure 3b).five pia subclusters group closely in the cladogram (m1-1 m1-2 m2-1 m2-2 and m2-5) (figure 3b).each of these sub- groups had enriched expression of s100a6 and lama1/2 with low expression of crabp2 and aldh1a2 (figure 3c) matching what principle cluster and if analysis support as pial fibroblasts.the outlier pia sub-group m2-3 had high expression of lama2 but also aldh1a2 and crabp2 (arachnoid markers) (figure 3c; table s3 tab 1).the other pial outlier subcluster m2-6 had low expres- sion of s100a6 lama1/2 and ngfr but enriched expression of postn crym and tgfbi (figure 3c; table s3 tab 1).the hierarchical analysis classified the m3-1 m3-2 and m3-3 subclusters into the arachnoid clade with m2-4 as an arachnoid related outlier (figure 3b).fibroblasts in the arachnoid clade are enriched for crabp2 and aldh1a2 matching principal cluster and if analysis along with wnt6 tagln and ogn (figure 3c; table s3 tab 2).arachnoid outlier cluster m2-4 has very low expres- sion of crabp2 and aldh1a2 but enriched expression of arach- noid genes wnt6 and tagln (figure 3c; table s3 tab 1).the m4-1 and m4-2 subclusters group as dural fibroblasts in the hierarchical analysis (figure 3b) and show enriched expres- sion of crabp2 and ogn also in arachnoid clusters but unique expression of fxyd5 dkk2 tgfbi and mgp (figure 3c).dural outlier m3-4 is unique in that it has significantly enriched expression of s100a6 (pia) fxyd5 and tgfbi (dura) as compared to other m3 subclusters but lacks expression of dkk2 or mgp (figure 3c; table s3 tab 2).immunostaining for m-crystallin+ cells in the e14.5 dorsal thalamus meninges showed these cells were col1a1-gfp+ (figures 4h and 4i) and consistent with gene expression analysis (figure 3c; table s3 tab 1) do not co-ex- press p75ntr (pia) or crabp2 (arachnoid/dura) (figures 4j and 4k).genes for tgfb and fgf ligands and shh were very low or figure 3.]
Patterns related to correlation among distinct fibroblast populations in the meninges are shown, with specific gene expression enrichments in each population.

Text 504
10.1016/j.cels.2020.06.004
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 6. smarca5 requires dppa2 to induce zga-like transcription (a) normalized expression levels (log2 reads per kilobase per million; rpkm) of dppa2 (orange, triangles) and smarca5 (purple, squares) in oocytes and preimplantation development (data analyzed from xue et al., 2013). data are shown as mean plus standard deviation of biological replicates. (b) representative single optical slices of zygotes (top row) and two-cell stage embryos (bottom row) immunostained for dppa2 and smarca5, showing single channels and composites. scale bars represent 20 mm. (c) box-plots showing pearson correlation coefficients calculated for co-localization of dppa2 and smarca5 in the pronuclei of 10 zygotes and in the nuclei of 10 two-cell stage embryos. co-localization values in the two pronuclei in zygotes and nuclei of each blastomere in two-cell embryos were measured separately. dppa2 and smarca5 co-localize in two-cell embryos but not in zygotes (p value < 0.0001, mann-whitney two-tailed test).']. Reference sentences:[both dppa2 and smarca5 are expressed at the mrna level throughout preim- plantation development with smarca5 being more highly ex- pressed in the oocyte than dppa2 which increases in its expres- sion from the two-cell stage (figure 6a).consistent with our overexpres- sion results analysis of recently published smarca5 ko tran- scriptomic data (barisic et al. 2019) revealed that loss of smarca5 led to downregulation of zga transcripts (figure 6d).analysis of published rna-seq data of smarca5 ko escs (barisic et al. 2019) revealed that wild type (wt) but not a catalytically dead smarca5 mutant was able to restore expression of the 391 zga genes downregu- lated upon smarca5 loss (figure 6d).as shown by rna-seq (figure 6d) expres- sion of zga genes was downregulated in smarca5 ko cells although not completely lost (figure 6e).interestingly dppa2 ko escs which have nearly absent levels of zgain transcripts (eckersley-maslin et al. 2019) (figure 6f) zga- like gene expression could not be induced by smarca5-egfp overexpression (figure 6f).fluorescence co-localization analysis in embryos (figure 6b) is described ‘‘immunoﬂuorescence and imaging’’ under methods de- tails.a mann-whitney two-tailed test was applied on pearson correlation coefficients and the p value is reported in the figure legend of figure 6c.]
Correlation between DPPA2 and SMARCA5 in two-cell embryos, not in zygotes.

Text 505
10.1126/sciadv.aba1972
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 5. trajectory analysis of krt5−/krt17+ cells. (a and b) slingshot-based pseudo-time trajectories calculated from umap embedding of (a) 6406 at2, transitional at2, at1, and krt5−/krt17+ cells and (b) 4611 scgb3a2+, transitional at2, at1, and krt5−/krt17+ cells. both (a) and (b) are composed entirely of cells from pf samples. each slingshot trajectory has a single start and a single end point, either at1 or krt5−/krt17+. the trajectories were then plotted together, leading to not only the appearance of a branching trajectory but also results in a crossing of trajectories. (c) rna-ish demonstrating krt17+ cells adjacent to sftpc+ and scgb3a2+ cells with low-level coexpression of multiple lineage markers in fibrotic regions of pf lung. (d and e) heatmap depicting relative expression (normalized and scaled z-scored) of the top 400 genes with significant variation across pseudo-time trajectories (generalized additive model; fdr,<0.01) from (d) at2 or (e) scgb3a2+ to krt5−/krt17+ cells. modules of expression were manually annotated to show stable expression (i), progression toward transitional at2 (ii), progression toward krt5−/krt17+ (iii), and stable krt5−/krt17+ (iv). (f) normalized expression levels of transcription factors with binding sites enriched for pseudo-time–associated genes and two representative target genes in each cell type split by control and pf and smoothed across the pseudo-time trajectories. cells from control samples representing the at2 to at1 trajectory are shown (fig s16) as a comparison. the gray shading represents the 99% ci. (g) a correlation of sox9 and sox4 with a putative target gene and known pf biomarker cdkn1a. each dot represents the average expression of the two genes within an individual. only individuals with detectable expression of both genes were included. the p values were calculated using a linear regression. (h) rna-ish demonstrating colocalization of sox9 and krt17 in a pf lung.']. Reference sentences:[at2 krt5−/krt17+ scgb3a2+ at1 ii iii iv c e f –5 0 5 –4 –2 0 2 4 umap_1 umap_2 –6 –4 –2 0 2 4 6 –4 –2 0 2 4 umap_1 a b 50 µm krt17 sox9 pf control h 0.0016 sox4 sox9 cdkn1a 0.0393 0.5 0.5 g 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 1.0 1.5 0.00.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 2.5 2.5 0 2 0 fig 5.2020; 6 : eaba1972 8 july 2020 scie n c e a d v a nces | resea r ch a rt icl e 8 of 15 scgb3a2+ cells (fig 5 a and b).consistent with this hypothesis rna-ish demonstrated krt17+ cells localizing near scgb3a2+ and sftpc+ cells in pf lungs (fig 5c) but not controls (fig s15).to better understand the transcriptional program driving krt5−/krt17+ cells we identified genes signifi- cantly associated with our slingshot-based trajectory starting from both at2 and scgb3a2+ cells (see materials and methods fig 5 d to f and table s8).both sox4 and sox9 are also associated with the trajectory (fig 5f) and are known to be key regulators of epithelial cells in the lung (42–44).furthermore we observed an increase in sox4 expression in transitional at2 cells high expression of sox4 in scgb3a2+ cells and high expression of sox9 in krt5−/krt17+ cells (fig 5f).we also observed a significant up-regulation of nr1d1 in at2 and transitional at2 cells from control lungs while it was near undetectable in pf samples (fig 5f and table s5).to this end we calcu- lated a pseudo-time trajectory from at2 cells to at1 cells using only cells from control lungs (fig 5f and fig s16).we also directly examined the relationship between expression of sox4 and sox9 and putative target genes in cells where both genes were expressed in at2 tran- sitional at2 or krt5−/krt17+ cells (see materials and methods fig 5g and fig s17).we identified significant associations between sox4 and sox9 and a number of genes with known function in pf including the known senescence marker cyclin dependent kinase inhibitor 1a (cdkn1a) (fig 5g and fig s17) (45).last we used rna-ish to demonstrate colocalization of krt17 and sox9 in the tissue from patients with pf (fig 5h).tfbs analysis for motif analysis findmotifs.pl (package homer v4.10) (65) was used on promoter sequences [700–base pair (bp) upstream and 100-bp downstream of transcription start-site (tss)] of genes in the trajectory heatmap (fig 5 d and e and table s9) using homer pre_built human promoter database and default parameters.the strength of the correlation was assessed across all in- dividuals with detectable expression of both genes using a linear regression and those with a nominal p value of less than 0.05 were plotted color-coded by pf and control (fig 5g and fig s17).]
Patterns of gene expression progression from at2 to krt5−/krt17+ cells, with correlations between sox4, sox9, and cdkn1a in pulmonary fibrosis.

Text 506
10.1126/sciimmunol.abd1554
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 2. immune landscape of covid19. (a) hierarchical clustering using the pearson correlation coefficient (pcc) of a normalized transcriptome between diseases in cell type resolution (n = 33). the color intensity of the heat map indicates the pcc values. the color bars above the heat map indicate the cell type and disease group. the black box indicates the cell types that highly correlate between the severe covid-19 and flu groups. (b) illustration of the enrichment pvalues for the select go biological pathways (n = 49) of differentially expressed genes (degs) in covid-19 and flu patients (left 6 columns: degs for covid-19 and flu groups compared to hd, right 2 columns: degs between covid19 and flu groups). (c) tsne plot of representative gene expression patterns for gbp1 (flu specific), crem (covid-19 specific) , and ccl3 (covid19/flu common). (d) top, dendrogram from wgcna analysis performed using']. Reference sentences:[unexpectedly all types of cells among pbmcs were clustered together according to the disease groups instead of cell-types (fig 2a).despite distinct transcriptional signatures between covid- 19 and influenza severe covid-19 and influenza shared tran- scriptional signatures in all types of monocytes and dcs (black boxed region in fig 2a) possibly reflecting common mechanisms underlying the innate immune responses in se- vere influenza and severe covid-19.for each group of differentially expressed genes (degs) we identified the top 10 enriched go biological pathways and collected them to demonstrate p-value enrichment in each group of degs (fig 2b).such disease-specific gene expression patterns were exemplified at single cell resolution by gbp1 (ifn-γ-mediated signaling pathway) being specifi- cally up-regulated in influenza crem (positive regulation of transcription) being specifically up-regulated in covid-19 and ccl3 (inflammatory response) being commonly up-reg- ulated (fig 2c and table s7).we expanded our analysis in a cell type specific manner by conducting weighted gene correlation network analysis (wgcna) (19) for the collected genes associated with fig 2b.we identified several modular expression patterns (fig 2d and table s8).in the covid-19 group nfkb1/2 jun and tnf were modularized in cd8+ t and nk cells (g6 and g7 in fig 2d) and il1b nfkbid and osm were modularized in all types of monocytes and dcs (g3 in fig 2d).in the influ- enza group gbp1 tap1 stat1 ifitm3 oas1 irf3 and ifng were modularized in all types of t cells and nk cells (g2 in fig 2d) and cxcl10 and tlr4 were modularized in all types of monocytes and dcs (g5 and part of g6 in fig 2d).however hierarchical clustering based on relative changes to the healthy donor group showed that all types of cells among pbmcs were clustered together according to the disease groups as shown in fig 2a indicating that there is disease- specific global impact across all types of cells among pbmcs.hierarchical clustering of variable gene expression among disease groups at cell type resolution in fig 2a and fig s2a to compare the highly variable gene expression among mild and severe covid-19 and influ- enza relative to healthy donors the normalized gene expres- sion used in fig s1e was divided by the values in the healthy donor group.in fig 2a hierarchical clustering analysis was performed based on the pccs of the selected highly variable genes.gene ontology analysis for biological pathways in fig 2b the degs in covid-19 and influenza compared to healthy donors or covid-19 compared to influenza were identified at cell type resolution.the -log10(p-values) are shown as a heat map in fig 2b.wgcna analysis to identify modular gene expression patterns the weighted gene correlation network analysis (wgcna) was conducted with the genes listed in the top 10 go biological pathways of ‘covid-19 up’ ‘flu up’ and ‘com- mon up’ defined in fig 2b.a list of degs and associated biological pathways in fig 2b.cell types in which the gbp1 crem and ccl3 were upregulated in fig 2c.a list of genes in each module obtained from wgcna in fig 2d.]
Patterns of correlation between gene expressions in different disease groups, particularly in monocytes and dendritic cells.

Text 507
10.1038/s41590-020-0731-4
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 2 | scrna-seq analysis of pdcs from 36-h mcmv-infected mice confirms their heterogeneity and pinpoints lifr downregulation as a selective marker of ifn-i-producing pdcs. a, flow cytometry gating strategy for index sorting of pdcs from one un mouse (top) and one 36-h mcmv-infected mouse (bottom). numbers in parentheses correspond to the number of cells sorted for each population. b,c, pca on 1,016 highly variable genes of single pdcs isolated from un mouse (b) or from one mcmv-infected mouse (ss2 dataset no. 1, c), encompassing 29 yfp+ cells (red) and 65 yfp– cells (blue). d, heatmap showing mrna expression of selected genes and yfp fluorescence intensity obtained from index sorting data, with hierarchical clustering using 1–pearson’s correlation as a distance metric for both cells and genes. e, scatter plots showing ifnb1 expression versus yfp fluorescence intensity (left), or ifnb1 versus eyfp mrna expression (right). f, violin plot showing lifr expression in yfp– versus yfp+ pdcs. g, scatter plot showing ifnb1 versus lifr mrna expression. h, flow cytometry analysis showing the downregulation of lifr protein expression on ifn-α/β+ (middle) or yfp+ (right) pdcs isolated from 36-h mcmv-infected ifnb1eyfp mice, compared with pdcs isolated from un animals (left). the dot plots shown are from one mouse representing 10 animals. i, relative mfi of lifr on ifn-α/β–yfp– (black), ifn-α/β+yfp– (blue), ifn-α/β+yfp+ (green) and ifn-α/β–yfp+ (pink) populations. the data are shown for n=10 individual animals pooled from two independent experiments, with overlay of mean±s.e.m. p<0.0001 (one-way anova with tukey’s post-hoc test).']. Reference sentences:[to better characterize pdc activation states without the confound- ing effect of crosscontamination between populations as can hap- pen in bulk transcriptomics we performed scrna-seq on splenic pdcs from one un mouse and one 36-h mcmv-infected ifnb1eyfp mouse (fig 2a) using smart-seq2 (ss2)31.principal component analysis (pca) did not show heteroge- neity in steady-state pdcs (fig 2b).in contrast the pdcs from the in mouse (fig 2c) clearly segregated along the first pca axis (pc1) into yfp+ (red dots) and yfp− (blue dots) subpopulations.based on the top pc1 genes hierarchical clustering not only separated most yfp– from yfp+ pdcs but also split yfp+ pdcs into two clusters (fig 2d).the first yfp+ pdc cluster co-expressed eyfp and ifn-i genes (fig 2d green arrow and names) therefore corresponding to the peak ifn-i+yfp+ activation state identi- fied by flow cytometry.most cells of the second yfp+ pdc clus- ter expressed neither eyfp nor ifn-i genes or expressed them at very low levels (fig 2d).however eyfp–yfp+ and eyfp+yfp+ pdcs shared the expression of other msgs including il12b ccl5 ccl3 and tnf (fig 2d blue names).compared with yfp– pdcs yfp+ pdcs expressed pdc-like cell/tdc/cdc genes including cd83 cd40 and ccr7 (fig 2d violet names).out of the 65 yfp− pdcs 4 segregated with yfp+ pdcs in both pca and hierarchical clustering (fig 2cd).these yfp− pdcs expressed high levels of eyfp and ifn-i genes (fig 2de) confirm- ing that detectable induction of ifn-i precedes that of yfp.eyfp and ifn-i gene expressions were tightly correlated in single pdcs (fig 2de and see also supplementary table 1) consistent with the known synchronous induction of all ifn-i (ref.reciprocally lifr was selectively downregulated in the vast majority of ifnb1+ pdcs regardless of their yfp expression (fig 2fg).flow cytometry analy- sis confirmed a stronger downregulation of leukemia inhibitory fac- tor receptor (lifr) on yfp+ or ifn-i+ pdcs (fig 2hi) whereas cd83 and ccr7 were induced only on a fraction of yfp+ pdcs.as ifn-i+ pdcs express the highest levels of bst2 (fig 1a) we combined lifr downregulation with yfp and bst2 expression for enriching eyfp+yfp− pdcs (see extended data fig 2a).this led to a contamination of pdcs by lim- ited numbers of pdc-like or b cells none of which was yfp+ (see supplementary data 1 and extended data fig 2b–f).the remaining cells were bona fide pdcs expressing high levels of key pdc signature genes includ- ing klk1 siglech pacsin1 dntt and irf8 (see extended data fig 2f black arrows) but low levels of the genes specific to lymphocytes36 b cells plasma cells37 or pdc-like cells11 (see extended data fig 2f).both monocle (fig 4e and see also extended data fig 2g) and velocyto (fig 4f and see also extended data fig 2h) predicted sim- ilar waves of gene expression along the pdc activation trajectory.]
Summary: Correlation between IFN-I gene expression and LIFR downregulation in single PDCs during viral infection.

Text 508
10.1038/s41590-020-0731-4
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 3 | scrna-seq analysis identifies seven different pdc activation states in vivo during mcmv infection. a, dimensional reduction performed using the umap algorithm, and graph-based cell clustering, for 264 bona fide pdcs isolated from one control mouse and one 36-h mcmv-infected mouse (ss2 dataset no. 2). b, the asinh fluorescence intensity of yfp projected on the umap space. c,d, expression of eyfp (c) and ifnb1 (d) on the umap space. e, violin plots showing mrna expression profiles of selected genes across all individual cells and in comparison between the clusters identified in a: cluster 0=un pdcs, clusters 1–4=mcmv eyfp–yfp– pdcs, cluster 5= mcmv eyfp+yfp– pdcs, cluster 6=mcmv eyfp+yfp+ pdcs and cluster 7=mcmv eyfp–yfp+ pdcs. f, heatmap showing mrna expression levels of selected genes (rows) across individual pdcs (columns), with hierarchical clustering using 1–spearman’s rank correlation for cells and kendall’s tau distance for genes. the top differentially expressed genes between seurat clusters are shown, as well as representative isgs and pdc-specific genes. b2m was included as an invariant control housekeeping gene. yfp and lifr protein fluorescence intensities, obtained from index sorting data, are also shown at the top of the heatmap, as well as the infection status of the mice from which the pdcs were isolated, and where individual pdcs in the seurat cell clusters belonged. g, lifr expression intensity projected on the umap space. h, violin plots showing asinh fluorescence intensity of yfp and lifr across seurat clusters. i, violin plots showing mrna expression profiles of selected genes across seurat clusters.']. Reference sentences:[on uniform manifold approximation and projection (umap) dimensionality reduction and graph-based cell clustering (fig 3a) the pdcs from the un mouse regrouped together (c0) remotely from the seven clusters derived from the pdcs of the in mouse.projection on the umap of the expression levels of yfp (fig 3b) eyfp (fig 3c) and ifnb1 (fig 3d) identified the clusters correspond- ing to the three pdc activation states uncovered in our previous experiments: eyfp+yfp– (c5) eyfp+yfp+ (c6) and eyfp–yfp+ (c7).lifr expression was downregulated most strongly in clusters c5 c6 and c7 (fig 3gh) thus helping to 20 pc1 (3%) 0 10 0 –5 5 pc2 (2.6%) uninfected –10 0 10 –20 –10 –5 0 5 10 pc2 (2.4%) 36-h mcmv yfppos yfpneg pc1 (8.6%) ifnb1 yfp 1 2 3 4 5 6 0 2 4 0 2 4 0 2 4 6 8 ifnb1 eyfp lifr 2 4 6 8 ifn-α/β – yfp – ifn-α/β + yfp – ifn-α/β + yfp + ifn-α/β – yfp + relative mfi lifr 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 yfp yfp status b2m tcf4 ccr9 klk1 bst2 ly6a ly6c2 ly6d irf7 siglech tsc22d1 lifr fyb ppfia4 pik3cd clec10a eldr egr1 nr4a1 clcf1 ifna15 ifna16 ifna12 ifna14 ifna4 ifna2 ifna13 ifna1 ifna11 ifna7 ifna5 ifna9 ifna6 ifnab ifnb1 eyfp ppp1r15a ifnl3 stat5a ifnl2 nr4a3 kdm6b tnf ccl4 ccl3 jun mir155hg ccr7 ccl5 bcl2a1d bcl2a1b gla cd83 il27 tnfsf15 lta il12b bcl2l1 ebi3 fam129a cd40 lad1 sema6d tubb6 yfp expression 2 3 5.8 mrna expression 12 9 5 2 0 yfp status – + 0 0 a b e h i f g c d 36.37 92.36 94.52 99.06 81.81 fsc-a ssc-a 104 105 live/dead aqua 0 50000 100000 150000 200000 250000 0 50000 100000 150000 200000 250000 0 103 104 105 0 103 lin (cd3 cd19 nk1.1 ly6g)-alexa700 lin (cd3 cd19 nk1.1 ly6g)-alexa700 0 103 104 105 10–3 0 103 104 105 10–3 103 102 104 105 0 0 50000 100000 150000 200000 250000 fsc-a 0 50000 100000 150000 200000 250000 bst2-percp-ef710 un 100.00 un (94) 104 105 103 0 103 104 105 10–3 0 yfp bst2-percp-ef710 cd11c-bv421 0 50000 100000 150000 200000 250000 cd11b-apc-cy7 fsc-a 26.75 85.18 92.21 71.45 2.13 97.79 yfpneg (n=65) yfppos (n=29) 84.52 84.52 104 105 0live/dead aqua 103 104 105 0 103 0 103 104 105 10–3 0 50000 100000 150000 200000 250000 0 50000 100000 150000 200000 250000 bst2-percp-ef710 104 105 103 0 yfp 0 103 104 105 10–3 bst2-percp-ef710 103 102 104 105 0 cd11c-bv421 fsc-w 0 50000 100000 150000 200000 250000 fsc-w 0 103 104 105 10–3 cd11b-apc-cy7 0 50000 100000 150000 200000 250000 fsc-a ssc-a 0 50000 100000 150000 200000 250000 fsc-a fsc-a 36-h mcmv ifnb1 0 2 4 2 4 6 8 lifr yfpneg yfppos yfp 36-h mcmv 0 ifn-α/β-alexa647 lifr-pe 104 104 105 105 0 103 103 yfp 104 105 0 103 104 105 0 103 un 36-h mcmv fig 2 | scrna-seq analysis of pdcs from 36-h mcmv-infected mice confirms their heterogeneity and pinpoints lifr downregulation as a selective marker of ifn-i-producing pdcs.in con- trast to steady-state pdcs (c0) all pdc clusters from the in mouse (c1–c7) harbored high expression of oasl1 (fig 3i) and other isgs (fig 3f red names) confirming that all individual pdcs had responded to ifn-i at 36 h post-infection.the expression of il12b ccr7 and several other genes occurred in c6 rather than c5 and was maintained in c7 thus being delayed and prolonged compared with ifn-i genes (fig 3f violet names; fig 3i).we analyzed the kinetics of ifn-i yfp and il-12 expression in pdcs during infection (see extended data fig 3).interleukin (il)-12 peak production was reached later than that of ifn-i (see extended data fig 3ab) and at each time point analyzed most il-12+ pdcs were yfp+ (see extended data fig 3c).]
Patterns related to correlation between gene expressions and cell clusters in single-cell transcriptomics data.

Text 509
10.1038/s41590-020-0736-z
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 8 | bacterial infection reprograms the structure of the neutrophil population and the dynamic transition between each subpopulation. a, comparison of the organ distributions of each neutrophil subpopulation before and after e. coli challenge, measured by cell number. b, comparison of neutrophil dynamics (with the velocity field projected on the umap plot) before and after e. coli challenge. c, neutrophil proportion (left) and cell number (right) in the peritoneal cavity, measured at different time points after e. coli challenge. results are the means±s.d. of three independent experiments (n=3 mice for each time point). d, left: umap of e. coli-challenged neutrophils from bm, pb, spleen and peritoneal cavity, colored by cluster identity. right: peritoneal cavity cells are highlighted in the umap plot. the proportions of each neutrophil cluster in the pc are shown below. e, comparison of apoptosis scores and necroptosis scores between control and e. coli-challenged neutrophils for g3–g5 clusters. statistical significance was determined by student’s t-test. p≤0.0001. f, dynamic transition between neutrophil subpopulations under steady-state and bacterial infection conditions. we cataloged differentiating and mature mouse neutrophils in an unbiased manner using scrna-seq. based on the correlation analyses (supplementary fig 3), the g0, g1, g2, g3 and g4 clusters characterized here were aligned to bm gmp, proneu, preneu, immneu and mneu cells, respectively. the names proneu, preneu, immneu and mneu were adopted from ref. 6. g5a, g5b and g5c (the major neutrophil populations in pb) represented the most mature neutrophils with typical polymorphonuclear morphology and were named pmna, pmnb and pmnc, respectively. under homeostatic conditions, the pmna cells in pb can arise from both mneu and immneu, while pmnb cells mainly arise from bm mneu cells. the transformation from immneu to pmna cells was suppressed during infection and immneu cells in infected hosts predominantly differentiated to mneu cells.']. Reference sentences:[overall there was a coherent drift in gene regulatory network activities in each subpopulation after bacterial challenge (extended data fig 8a) perhaps driven by upregulation of defense response-associated transcription factor networks such as irf7 and downregulation of metabolic transcription factor networks such fig 5 | bacterial infection primes neutrophils for augmented functionality without affecting their overall heterogeneity.interestingly we also identified transcription factor networks (for example fos and atf4) showing different responses in immature (upregulated) and mature (downregulated) populations (extended data fig 8b).in bm the proportion of g1 cells increased during bacterial infection indicating elevated proliferation of myeloid progenitors (fig 5b and fig 8a).velocity analysis showed that the obvious transformation from g3 to g5a cells under homeostatic conditions was suppressed during infection and g3 cells in infected hosts predominantly dif- ferentiated to g4 cells (fig 8b and supplementary fig 5).g4 cells decreased from 38 to 30% in bm but significantly increased in pb and spleen (fig 5b and fig 8a).pb g4 cells were mainly derived from bm g3 cells (fig 8b).additionally infection significantly suppressed the g5a and g5b to g5c transition leading to a smaller g5c population in e. coli-challenged hosts (fig 5b and fig 8b).regardless of whether we investigated all (g0–g5) (fig 8b and supplementary fig 5) or only post-mitotic (g3–g5) (supplementary fig 6) neutrophils a similar pattern of cell transition and fate direction was observed.to assess neutrophil heterogeneity at the site of infection neutrophils were extracted from the inflamed peritoneal cavity (fig 8cd).interestingly although g5c cells accounted for only about 25% of pb neutrophils before bacterial challenge and <10% of pb neutrophils after bacte- rial challenge >45% of peritoneal cavity neutrophils in challenged mice were g5c cells (fig 8d) suggesting that these cells may possess higher transendothelial migration capability than g5a or g5b cells.g5c neutrophils showed the highest aging score compared with other g5 cells (fig 2ij) with no difference detected among bm pb and spleen g5c cells in unchallenged mice (supplementary fig 8a).during bacterial infection the aging score and the proportion of aged cells in the peritoneal cavity g5c population became signifi- cantly higher compared with in the pb and spleen g5c populations (supplementary fig 8b).paradoxically genes related to apoptosis or necroptosis were significantly upregulated in every neutrophil subpopulation in e. coli-challenged mice (fig 8e) indicating that the delayed neutrophil death in infected hosts is mainly determined by the activation of apoptotic factors and pathways rather than the level of the related proteins.based on correlation analyses (extended data fig 2) the g0 g1 g2 g3 and g4 clusters aligned to bm gmp proneu preneu immneu and mneu respectively (fig 8f).pb contained three main neutrophil subsets (g5a g5b and g5c) which represented the most mature neutrophils with typical poly- morphonuclear morphology and were named pmna pmnb and pmnc respectively (fig 8f).they were more similar to pmna than pmnc neutrophils and the majority of pmnb neutrophils directly developed from bm mneu (fig 8f).]
Patterns related to cell transition and fate direction were observed in neutrophil subpopulations under steady-state and bacterial infection conditions, characterized by correlation analyses.

Text 510
10.1038/s41590-020-0743-0
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 4 | b cell analysis reveals the presence of double-negative (cd19+igd−cd27−cxcr5−) b cells in csle. a, bar plots highlighting cell abundances across b-scs (n=7) for the csle and chd groups (left panel) and sledai categories (right panel). b, a heat map representing scaled expression values of the top 10 genes defining each of the b-scs (n=7, see methods). c, umap plots representing b-scs (n=7), groups (csle or chd), sledai categories and expression values of selected genes. d, a heat map representing scaled expression values of dn2, selected isgs and other b cell gene markers across the seven b-scs. e, individual umap plots from five representative chd (left panel) and csle (right panel, entire figure in extended data fig 3d) samples based on b-scs (n=7). each color represents a distinct sc. f, correlation analysis comparing the percentage of dn2 (cd19+igd−cd27−cxcr5−) cells, as quantified by flow cytometry, with the percentage of b-sc5 cells within the total b cells as quantified by scrna-seq.']. Reference sentences:[subclustering (n = 29240) led to seven scs (sc0 to sc6) three of which were expanded in csle (b-sc1 n = 5989; 87% csle b-sc4 n = 3202; 80% csle and b-sc5 n = 2101; 93% csle; fig 4a).isg expression was restricted to b-sc5 b-sc4 and to a lesser extent b-sc1 the three csle-expanded scs (fig 4b and supplementary table 2e).b-sc5 exclusively expressed tbx21 (t-bet) itgax (cd11c) fgr tfec fcrl2 fcrl3 and fcrl5 as well as il10ra supporting its extrafollicular potentially autoreactive dn2 phenotype35 (fig 4c).b-sc4 and b-sc5 expressed the highest levels of tlr7 (fig 4d).b-sc5 barely detectable in individuals in the chd group was present in >50% (18/33) of patients in the csle group (8/18 and 9/13 of patients in the csle group with sledai ≤ 4 and > 4 respec- tively; fig 4e and extended data fig 3d).the dn2 cell frequency determined by flow cytometry (cd19+ igd− cd27− cxcr5−) cor- related with scrna-seq data (p < 0001 and r2 = 0.954; fig 4f) despite their known sensitivity to cryopreservation we detected 724 pcs (17% and 83% in patients in the chd and csle groups respectively).while absent from individuals in the chd group the isghi t-sc4 was present in 23/33 patients in the csle group (11/18 and 12/13 csle with sledai ≤ 4 and > 4 respectively; fig 6c and extended data fig 4a).c individual umap plots from five representative chd (top) and csle (bottom entire figure in extended data fig 4a) samples based on t-scs (n = 6).flow cytometry analysis of pbmcs from 17 csle and 14 matched chd samples revealed high expres- sion of cytotoxic proteins (granzyme b and perforin) in csle cd8+ t cells but did not reach the resolution of scrna-seq (extended data fig 4bc).while absent from individuals in the chd group the isghi nk-sc2 was present in 19/33 of patients in the csle group (8/18 and 10/13 csle with sledai ≤ 4 and > 4 respec- tively; extended data fig 4d).isg15 and cd56 protein expression was increased in two out of five of the patients in the csle group (extended data fig 4e).scg1 had the highest erythrocyte sedimentation rate and the lowest complement (c3 and c4) levels (extended data fig 4f) among scgs.]
Correlation between dn2 cell frequency and b-sc5 cells in csle patients, validated by flow cytometry and scRNA-seq data.

Text 511
10.1038/s41556-020-0547-3
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 2 | transcriptional state predicts migratory capacity. a, the set-up of the single-cell migration assay using lens-free imaging. left, a microfluidics device containing single-cell migration channels is loaded with cells, covered with a glass slide and placed on top of a complementary metal-oxide-semiconductor sensor (cmos) that detects diffraction of the emitted laser through the migration device to track the movement of single cells. middle, the layout of the microfluidics migration device. cells are loaded into the seeding channel and migrate through the small migration channels (6×10μm). right, a reconstructed image of the cells (circles) moving in the migration channels in the direction of the red arrows. b, analysis of the mean-squared displacement (msd; n=368), velocity (n=368) and maximal distance travelled (n=370) of single cells shows a gradual increase from melanocytic to mesenchymal-like cultures. c, the expression of cell-migratory-potential genes29 correlates with the migratory behaviour. d, the migratory behaviour of single cells (left) in the mm lines replicates measurements from a bulk migration assay (right), with the cultures classified as mesenchymal-like migrating most rapidly. for the bulk migration analysis, data are mean±s.e.m. e,f, a umap analysis of single cells (n=368) generated on the basis of their migratory capabilities shows that the velocity of the cells (e) correlates with the state of the cells (f). p values were calculated using the wilcoxon rank-sum test with benjamini–hochberg fdr correction, two-sided. for the box plots, the centre line shows the median and the box limits show the upper and lower quartiles.']. Reference sentences:[finally we verified these observations using droplet sequencing (drop-seq) of a biological replicate of mm057 (supplementary fig 2 supplementary table 1).to this end we tested their migratory ability at the single-cell level using a collagen-coated microfluidics chip28 (fig 2a).the mean-squared displacement average velocity and maximal distance reached revealed a wide variety of migratory abilities within and across melanoma cultures (fig 2b).the three mesenchymal-like mm lines covered the longest distance within 24 h. interestingly two out of the three intermediate cultures (mm057 and mm087) also showed a high degree of cell migration (fig 2b).a gene signature that is predictive for migration in bladder cancer29 follows the same global trend as the empirically measured migration with the exception of mm074 and mm087 (fig 2c).analogous visualiza- tion of bulk and single-cell migration data highlights their significant agreement (fig 2d extended data fig 2); the single-cell data show higher-resolution information.dimensionality reduction using umap31 of the cell-feature matrix indicates a continuous gradient that strongly correlates with velocity (fig 2e).mesenchymal-like cultures are enriched among the fastest-migrating cells whereas melanocytic and intermediate cultures are enriched among slowest and intermediate cells respectively (fig 2f).the chip was covered with a glass slide to avoid evaporation and was placed on the complementary metal-oxide-semiconductor sensor of the lfi device28 in the incubator (the set-up is shown in fig 2a).fig 1: gse134432 fig 2: gse134432 and migration information on the open science framework fig 3: gse134432 3 nature research | reporting summary october 2018 fig 4: gse134432 fig 5: gse134432 gse115978 fig 6: gse134432 fig 7: gse134432 gsm3144740-3144747 gsm1517752 gsm803500 extended data 1: gse134432 extended data 2: migration information on the open science framework extended data 3: gse134432 extended data 4: gse134432 gsm1517752 gsm803500 gsm659790 extended data 5: gse115978 extended data 6: gse115978 extended data 7: gse134432 and uncropped western blots in source data extended data 8: gse134432 extended data 9: gse134432 extended data 10: gse134432 suppl.fig 2: gse134432 suppl.]
Patterns related to cell migratory potential correlate with gene expression, as shown by single-cell transcriptomics analysis.

Text 512
10.1016/j.cell.2020.06.032
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 4. trem2 defines two populations of tumor-infiltrating myeloid suppressive cells (a) schematic of the experimental design. (b) gene expression heatmap of 42 genes from 7,648 cells clustered into 77 metacells of arg1+ and arg1à cells. the top bar plot shows the arg1 enrichment score (fraction in the arg1+ over arg1à samples). (c) gene-gene pearson correlation heatmap of 42 markers genes within the arg1+ and arg1à metacells. the top bar plot shows the pearson correlation between gene expression and arg1 enrichment score. (d and e) qpcr analysis of arg1 (d) and trem2 (e) expression fold change in the different cell populations compared with ly6c+. error bars indicate mean ± sem.']. Reference sentences:[to deeply characterize myeloid sup- pressor cells within the tme we applied ins-seq to isolate and profile arg1-expressing cells from a mouse tumor model and define their cellular and molecular pathways (figure 4a).analysis of the arg1+ and arg1= metacells resulted in the de novo identification of a rich set of co-regulated gene modules (figure 4c).furthermore the pdpnhigh myeloid population was strongly associated with cx3cr1high and gpnmbhigh markers (figure 4f).analysis of a large set of proteins defined by our single-cell data revealed similar results as those observed in our facs analysis (figure 4g; star methods).]
Patterns of gene co-regulation and correlation within distinct myeloid cell populations, identified by single-cell transcriptomics.

Text 513
10.1126/science.abc6261
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 5. attenuated inflammatory response in peripheral innate immune cells from covid-19 patients. (a) flow cytometry analysis of pbmcs analyzed in parallel to the cite-seq experiment. shown is the log10 median fluorescence intensity of hla-dr expression. (b) median intensity of hla-dr expression in phospho-cytof experiment from fig 1. n: hk (healthy = 30, moderate = 15, severe = 10), atlanta (healthy = 17, moderate = 4, severe = 13). the boxes indicate median, upper and lower quartiles. the whisker length equals 1.5x the interquartile range. (c) relative expression of genes encoding different cytokines in the bulk rnaseq dataset. the boxes show median, upper and lower quartiles and the whiskers show 5 – 95 percentiles. (d) umap representation of s100a12 expression in pbmcs from all samples analyzed by cite-seq. (e and f) correlation analysis of s100a12 expression in cells from myeloid and dendritic cell clusters (c mono_1, nc mono, cdc2, pdc, c mono_ifn, c mono_2, c mono_3) with en-rage levels in plasma (e) or hla-dpa1 expression in the same clusters (f) (n = 5 healthy and 7 covid-19 subjects). the statistical significance between the groups in (b) and (c) was determined by two-sided mann-whitney rank-sum test p < 0.05; p<0.01, p<0.001.']. Reference sentences:[consistent with this we ob- served a reduction in the expression of the proteins cd86 and hla-dr on monocytes and mdcs of covid-19 patients which was most pronounced in subjects with severe covid- 19 infection (fig 5a and fig s16a).using the phospho-cytof data from both the atlanta and the hong kong cohorts we confirmed the reduced expression of hla-dr on monocytes and mdcs in patients with severe covid-19 disease (fig 5b).in contrast s100a12 the gene encoding en-rage was strik- ingly increased in pbmcs of covid-19 patients while the ex- pression of genes encoding other proinflammatory cytokines was either absent or unchanged compared to healthy controls (fig 5c and fig s16b).notably the s100a12 expression was highly restricted to monocyte clusters (fig 5d) and showed a significant correlation with en-rage protein levels in plasma measured by olink (fig 5e).finally we examined if there is an association between hla-dr and s100a12 expres- sion in our dataset and found a strong inverse correlation be- tween s100a12 gene expression and the genes encoding the antigen presentation machinery (hla-dpa1 hla-dpb1 hla-dr cd74) (fig 5f and fig s17).this was con- sistent with lack of or diminished expression of the genes en- coding il-6 and tnf in the cite-seq analysis (fig 5c).this concept was further supported by the cytof and flow cytometry data showing decreased hla-dr and cd86 expression respectively in my- eloid cells (fig 5 d and e and fig s16).the gene encoding en-rage was however expressed at high levels in blood my- eloid cells in patients with severe covid-19 (fig 5 c to f) although it is also possible that en-rage is also expressed in the lung.]
Summary: Correlation between S100A12 expression in monocytes and en-RAGE levels, and inverse correlation with antigen presentation genes in COVID-19 patients.

Text 514
10.1126/science.abc6261
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 6. systemic release of microbial products in severe covid-19 infection. (a to c) box plots showing bacterial 16s rrna gene (a) and lps (b) measured in plasma of healthy or infected individuals (c) spearman’s correlation between cytokines and bacterial dna measured in plasma. each dot represents a sample (n = 18 and 51 for healthy and infected, respectively). colors of the dots indicate severity of clinical disease as shown in the legends. the boxes show median, upper and lower quartiles in the box plots. the whiskers show 5 – 95 percentiles. the differences between the groups was measured by mann-whitney rank sum test ( p < 0.001).']. Reference sentences:[strikingly the plasma of severe and icu patients had significantly higher levels of bacterial dna as measured by pcr quantitation of bacterial 16s rrna gene product and lps as measured by a tlr4-based reporter assay (fig 6 a and b).furthermore there was a significant correlation between bacterial dna or lps and the plasma levels of the inflammatory mediators il- 6 tnf mcp-3 en-rage tnfsf14 and osm (fig 6c and fig s19).]
Summary: Correlation between bacterial DNA/LPS levels and inflammatory mediators in plasma of severe COVID-19 patients.

Text 515
10.1126/sciadv.aba9869
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 2. distinctive features of harpegnathos neurons and glia. (a) annotated tsne visualization for the reclustering of neurons from six worker and five gamergate replicates at day 30. (b) heatmap plotted over neuronal tsne showing normalized umis for known mushroom body markers from drosophila (left) and a. mellifera (right). (c) heatmap plotted over neuronal tsne for the kc marker pka-c1 from two drosophila single-cell rna-seq datasets, one from the central brain after removing optic lobes [left; (15)] and one from the whole brain, inclusive of the optic lobes [right; (14)]. (d) relative abundance of kcs as determined by percentage of neurons in clusters that express pka-c1 in harpegnathos brains and in the two drosophila single-cell rna-seq datasets. horizontal bars indicate means±sem. (e) immunofluorescence for the neuronal marker synapsin and the kc marker pka-c1in harpegnathos (left) and drosophila (right) with 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (dapi) as nuclear counterstain. gray arrowhead, pedunculus; white arrowhead, calyx. (f) western blot (wb) for pka-c1in the indicated amount of total protein extract from drosophila (dmel) or harpegnathos (hsal) brains. tubulin was used as loading control. (g) annotated tsne visualization for the reclustering of glia from six worker and five gamergate replicates at day 30. (h) clustered heatmap showing the pairwise pearson correlation score between collapsed transcriptomes (pseudobulk analysis) of glia clusters, considering only variable genes that were used to define the clusters by seurat. (i) relative abundance of key glia subsets in harpegnathos single-cell rna-seq, drosophila single-cell rna-seq from the whole brain (14), and as defined by glial subset-specific expression of gal4 (20). bars indicate means + sem.']. Reference sentences:[large mushroom bodies in the harpegnathos brain to better characterize neuronal populations in harpegnathos we reclustered in isolation all the transcriptomes from neuronal clus- ters 0 to 10 (fig 2a and tables s2 and s4) and found that most of neurons (54% corresponding to 36% of all brain cells) expressed genes that mark kcs in drosophila (mub and pka-c1) and apis mellifera (plc and e75) (fig 2b and fig s2 a and b).our single-cell rna-seq confirms this conclusion as kcs comprise a much larger fraction (54%) of neurons in harpegnathos than in drosophila (5 to 10%) (fig 2 c and d and fig s2c) even after accounting for differences in the datasets by equalizing read numbers and umi distributions (fig s2 d f h and i).immunofluorescence stain- ings for the kc marker pka-c1 in harpegnathos labeled structures with the anatomical features of mushroom bodies including a thick pedunculus (fig 2e gray arrowhead) and prominent double cup-shaped calyces (fig 2e white arrowhead) characteristic of hymenoptera (7 24).consistent with the increased frequency of kcs in our single-cell data harpegnathos mushroom bodies appeared to occupy a larger relative volume in the ant brain as compared to the corresponding structures in drosophila (fig 2e).additional low signal was observed in other brain regions and likely explained by antibody cross-reactivity or low-level scattered expression of pka-c1 in non-kc cells (see fig 2b).western blots for pka-c1 from total brain extracts revealed higher relative levels of this protein in ants as compared to flies (fig 2f).the larger mushroom body of harpegnathos comprised a diverse repertoire of kc transcriptomes as they separated into five clusters compared to the three clusters found in drosophila (fig 2 a and c).we reclustered and assigned identities to glia cells using genes homolo- gous to known drosophila markers (fig 2g and fig s3 a to c; see table s2 for references).we identified cortex glia (wrapper and zyd) two clusters of astrocytes (astrocytes a and b in fig 2g; eaat1 and gat or rh50) perineurial glia (vkg and tret) and ensheathing glia (egr tsf1 and idgf4).2020; 6 : eaba9869 19 august 2020 scie n c e a d v a nces | resea r ch a rt icl e 4 of 15 one cluster displayed eaat1 expression and a transcriptome closely related to those of the two other types of astrocytes (fig 2h) and we named it “astrocytes c.” in addition three clusters (g0 g1 and g2) expressed multiple glia markers but could not be unequivocally assigned to known transcriptional types (fig 2g and table s5).the three distinct classes of harpegnathos astrocytes comprised ~40% of total glia cells which was comparable to the frequency of astrocytes in drosophila (fig 2i) as measured by fluorescence microscopy using genetic reporters (20) and single-cell rna-seq (14).similarly the proportion of ensheathing glia in harpegnathos (24% of all glia) was comparable to their frequency in genetically labeled drosophila brains (fig 2i) suggesting that single-cell rna-seq protocols efficiently capture the transcriptomes of these two cell types.perineurial glia which envelop the outer surface of the brain were a threefold larger fraction of drosophila (15%) than harpegnathos (4%) glia (fig 2i).technical difficulties seemingly affected the recovery of cortex drosophila; reporters harpegnathos; single-cell drosophila; single-cell % of glia 10 20 30 40 0 perineurial cortex astrocytes ensheathing tsne 2 n0 a a b c n1 b n2 n3 n4 mub umi 2 5 pka-c1 umi 0 4 plcε umi 1 5 e75 umi 1 4 general kc markers class i kcs other kcs dopaminergic neuron reclustering 12542 cells a c d b g h i g0 g1 g2 cortex tsne 2 ensheathing astrocytes b astrocytes a perineurial tsne 1 astrocytes c 3544 cells glia reclustering g2 perineurial cortex ensheathing g1 g0 astrocytes a astrocytes b astrocytes c 0.2 1 pearson correlation g2 perineurial cortex g0g1ensheathing astrocytes a astrocytes b astrocytes c umi 3 5 umi 2 5 pka-c1 in drosophila brains central brain whole brain 20 40 60 harpegnathos drosophila kcs (% of neurons) central brain whole brain e f dapi dapi synapsin synapsin pka-c1 pka-c1 merged merged drosophila 0.5 mm harpegnathos 37– 50– wb: pka-c1 (~40 kda) wb: tubulin (~55 kda) dmel hsal dmel hsal dmel hsal 1 µg 2 µg 4 µg 0.1 mm fig 2.the former num- ber is comparable to our quantifications by single-cell rna-seq in harpegnathos (fig 2i) and suggests that the honeycomb-like struc- ture of this glia subtype (20) might hamper their recovery in single- cell suspensions in both species.(c) visualization and quantification of worker (left) and gamergate (right) contributions to the ensheathing glia cluster in the reclustered tsne for glia only (see fig 2g).the major distinction among neurons was between two types of kcs ikcs (three clusters) as previously defined in honeybees and other kcs (two clusters) which together account for a remarkable 54% of all harpegnathos neurons outside of the optic lobe (fig 2).additional evidence for the complexity of ant glia was found in the presence of three astrocyte subsets (fig 2) suggesting a sub- specialization of this cell type in ants.]
Summary: Correlation patterns between different glia clusters based on pairwise Pearson correlation scores.

Text 516
10.1016/j.stem.2020.08.001
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 2. fetal identity genes are inactivated, and adult genes are activated, in an uncoordinated manner (a) schematic overview of a coordinated transition from fetal to adult identity. as cells become older, individual genes or enhancers (shown as arrows) convert from a fetal-like to an adult-like state. the changes are uniform and precisely timed. (b) schematic overview of an uncoordinated transition. as cells become more adult-like, individual genes convert from a fetal-like to an adult-like state nonuniformly. (c and d) expression of igf2bp2 and cpne2 as a function of adult identity scores. (e and f) the fraction of igf2bp2-expressing hscs/hpcs declines with age, and the fraction cpne2-expressing hscs/hpcs increases with age. (g and h) wgcna for genes that are differentially expressed during hsc-to-hpc differentiation, with correlation coefficients indicating modular patterns of coexpression. (i and j) fetal and adult identity genes do not exhibit patterns of co-expression. see also figure s3.']. Reference sentences:[one possibility is that precise regulatory networks allow cells to mark time intrinsically and execute coor- dinated stage-specific changes in gene expression (figure 2a).a third possibility is that hscs and hpcs activate adult identity genes and inactivate fetal identity genes in an uncoordinated manner (figure 2b).in this model the pace of development is determined by the stochastic likelihood that individual genes figure 2.fetal genes such as igf2bp2 hmga2 and arid3a were ex- pressed not only in fetal hscs/hpcs but also in a subset of cells with high adult identity scores (figure 2c; figures s3a and s3b).likewise adult genes such as cpne2 h2-q7 and sdsl were expressed not only in adult hscs/hpcs but also in a subset of cells with low adult identity scores (figure 2d; figures s3c and s3d).a uniform transition should yield bi-modal changes in individual peak heights; that is if each enhancer changes uni- formly in all cells (figure 2a) then neonatal peaks will either be completely fetal-like or completely adult-like (figure 3j).a non- uniform transition should yield varying peak heights that trend incrementally toward adult heights over time; that is if each enhancer is accessible in some cells but not others (figure 2b) then neonatal peaks will range between fetal and adult heights (figure 3j).essentially every adult hsc identity gene was expressed in a percentage of fetal hscs and essentially every fetal identity gene was expressed in a percentage of adult hscs (figure 2; figure s3).]
Patterns of gene expression changes during cell differentiation are not coordinated, with some genes transitioning to adult-like states nonuniformly.

Text 517
10.1038/s41467-020-17876-0
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 1 single-nuclei transcriptomic cell atlas of the adult human cortex and substantia nigra (sn). t-distributed stochastic neighbour embedding (t-sne) plot of gene expression relationships amongst the single-nuclei cells from five individuals in the (a) substantia nigra (sn) (n = 5943) and (b) cortex (n = 10,706). c violin plots of expression values (log10 tpm values) of enriched cell-type-specific markers for the cell types in the sn (supplementary data 3). d uniform manifold approximation and projection (umap) plot of both the cortex and substantia nigra cell types (n = 16,649 cells) showing distinct clustering by cell type. e correlation heatmaps showing hierarchical clustering of pearson correlation scores calculated between averaged cell-type subclusters in both regions. the transcriptional correlation is largely explained by cell type and not by the region of origin. dans dopaminergic neurons, ex excitatory neurons, gaba gabaergic neurons, in inhibitory neurons, odc oligodendrocytes, opc oligo-precursor cells.']. Reference sentences:[we identified ten distinct cell populations across all samples within the sn (fig 1a supplementary fig 1 supplementary note 1) which included (i) astrocytes (gfap) with two subtypes: astrocyte-1 population expressing neuro- inﬂammatory genes (olr1) and an astrocyte-2 (gins3) population expressing genes associated with growth and reparative functions (supplementary table 2 and supplemen- tary fig 2)8 (ii) oligodendrocytes (odcs) (mog mobp) with three subtypes discriminated by oligodendrocyte marker genes palm2 lgals1 & ppm1g (iii) endothelial cells (rgs5) (iv) microglia cells (csf1r) (v) oligodendrocyte precursor cells (opcs) (vcan) (vi) dans (th and slc6a3) neuronal population of the sn pars compacta (supplementary fig 2) and (vii) gabaergic neurons neuronal population of the sn pars reticulata expressing gamma-aminobutyric acid (gaba) receptors gabra1 and gabrb2 and the enzymes gad1 and gad2 required for gaba neurotransmitter synthesis (fig 1a c supplementary data 2 and 3 supplementary fig 2).in the cortex we identified six distinct cell populations including: astrocytes excitatory neurons (ex) inhibitory neurons (in) odcs opcs and microglia but no distinct cluster for endo- thelial cells (fig 1b supplementary fig 3 and 4 supple- mentary data 2 and 3 supplementary note 1).a joint clustering of both sn and cortex regions revealed that the cortex and sn form distinct clusters by cell types (neuronal cells; odc; astrocyte microglia opc and endothelial cells) rather than by region (fig 1d e supplementary note 1).in this study (i) we re-identify all the major cell types previously reported indicating sufficient genes/cells coverage (ii) we find a large difference in the neuronal-glial cell composition between cortex and sn that confounds bulk tissue disease associations (fig 1 supplementary fig 10 and supplementary table 9) (iii) we identify multiple associations between the genetic risk of particular diseases and specific cell types in the nigra and cortex (fig 2) (iv) we find that where there are multiple neuropsychiatric disease associations for a given neuron type the loci associated for each disorder are distinct and do not appear to converge on the same set of genes within that cell type while for glia we do observe convergence (fig 3) and (v) we determine the different cell-specific gene- networks and their functions perturbed by disease-risk variants (fig 4 and 5).tests across all identified gene modules are reported in supplementary fig 10 and complete lists of enriched go terms are reported in supplementary data 6 and 7.for the sn single-nuclei atlas we generated biological replicates and showed that cell profiles from the same individual were comparable to each other (supplementary fig 11).cell cycle phase scores were predicted for each cell per sample and determined to not be an important source of variation and bias in the sn and cortex (supplementary fig 1 and 3).we characterised the cellular identities of clusters in the sn (supplementary notes 1 and 7 fig 1a c) and the cortex (supplementary notes 1 and 7 fig 1b) nuclei by identifying known marker genes enriched in each of the clusters (supplementary notes 1 and 7)636.this process resulted in the annotation of 23 and 10 different neuronal and non-neuronal cell types for the cortex and sn respectively (fig 1a b).comparison of the cortex and sn nuclei averaged cell-type populations with previously published single-cell human temporal cortex6 single nuclei5 and bulk sn laser-capture microscopy (lcm) dans7 and glial cell types8 data further confirmed the broad cell-type annotations and in the case of cortex neuronal subtype classification consistency (supplementary fig 12 supplementary note 8).in particular sn dans identified in our 10x study cluster with external lcm postmortem dans (supplementary fig 12) and astrocyte-1 or reactive astrocyte population cluster with the external lcm astrocyte and microglia samples (supplementary fig 12).in addition cell types are comparable between single-nuclei and single-cell data (supplementary fig 12).a correlation > 0.85 was observed between all the major cortical cell types and layer-specific neuronal subtypes between single-nuclei cell atlas interrogated in this study and the human visual cortex and frontal cortex single-nuclei-drop seq data5 (supplementary fig 12).while these methods are complementary we confirmed that their findings were well aligned (supplementary fig 13 supplementary note 4).]
Correlation patterns in gene expression among cell types in the cortex and substantia nigra, not by region.

Text 518
10.1016/j.celrep.2020.108077
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 3. diversified patterns of p53 target gene expression after dna damage (a) pathway enrichment analysis using the kegg database. counts in parentheses include genes whose involvement in p53 pathway was documented in the literature but was not included in the kegg database. p.adj, adjusted p value; fc, fold enrichment. (b–d) dot plot of the p53 pathway genes that were in the top 30 markers for each group. the size of the dot reﬂects the percentage of cells expressing the markers, while the color encodes average expression levels across all cells within the group (blue indicates high). cnot4 and sesns were not in the top 30 markers but were among the genes upregulated in the stress group. (e–g) average expression levels of individual p53 target genes in each group, normalized by their averaged expression in all cells, are presented in boxplot (e) and correlation scatterplots (f and g). the list of p53 target genes was obtained from a recent review (fischer, 2017). among the 116 targets, 89 were detected in our dataset and used for this analysis. each dot in the scatterplots represents an individual p53 target gene. p < 0.001; p < 0.0001; ns, non-significant, in tukey’s multiple comparison test. (h–j) gene expression feature plots of representative group-specific marker genes. approximate boundaries for each group are indicated by a dotted line. see also figure s3.']. Reference sentences:[different 5fu-induced cell groups exhibit distinct patterns of p53 target gene expression interestingly when the pathway enrichment analysis was per- formed using the kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes (kegg) database (kanehisa and goto 2000) all 5fu-treated groups identified the p53 signaling pathway as the top pathway enriched in each group (figure 3a).4 cell reports 32 108077 august 25 2020 resource ll open access the p53 targets were induced in all three 5fu-treated groups compared to the untreated group (figure 3e) and that their in- duction was generally higher in the apoptotic and stress groups than in the checkpoint group (figure 3e).the pro-apoptotic p53 target genes such as pmaip1 fas and ikbip (figure 3f) and p53 target genes important for stress resistance such as atf3 xpc and sesns (figure 3g) were the most highly expressed in the apoptotic and stress groups respectively.a e f g b c d i h j figure 3.sesn2 a dna-damage-inducible p53 target (ho et al. 2016) was also highly expressed in the stress group but less so in the other groups (figure 3d).ccne2 is degraded by an e3 ligase complex con- taining fbxw7 (klotz et al. 2009) whose encoding mrna is p53 inducible and upregulated in the apoptotic group (figure 3b).likewise cdkn1a is degraded by mdm2 (zhang et al. 2004) whose encoding mrna is upregulated in the checkpoint group (figure 3c) possibly limiting the cdkn1a protein expression in this group.]
Distinct patterns of p53 target gene expression in different cell groups, with higher induction in apoptotic and stress groups compared to the checkpoint group.

Text 519
10.1016/j.celrep.2020.108077
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 1. resource overview (a) rko, hct116, and sw480 cells were 5fu treated and subjected to drop-seq. (b) dna damage responses were characterized at the single-cell transcriptome level (left). major transcriptome phenotypes were identified (center), and the relationships between these phenotypes and cell-fate outputs were investigated (right). (c) the correlations between dna-damage-induced expression patterns of individual genes were investigated. a hypothetical pair of two genes (gene a and gene b) may be co-expressed (upper path) or expressed in a mutually exclusive pattern (lower path) across single cells. (d) major findings from the scrna-seq data were followed up by ﬂow cytometry. see also figure s1.']. Reference sentences:[using this cell-culture model of co- lon cancer chemotherapy we characterized the individual cell response to genotoxic 5fu treatments using single-cell rna sequencing (scrna-seq) technology (figure 1a).ll open access dna-damage-induced gene expression at the transcriptome level we were able to identify major transcriptome phenotypes after dna damage and relate them to dna-damage-induced cell-fate responses that include apoptosis and cell-cycle check- point (figure 1b).finally using ﬂow cytometry experiments we assessed whether the single-cell transcriptomic features could faithfully reﬂect the patterns of single-cell protein expression and cell- fate responses (figure 1d).d a b c figure 1.as illus- trated in figure 1a we treated these cell lines with 5fu.untreated or 5fu-treated cell lines were pooled and subjected to drop-seq (macosko et al. 2015; figure 1a).]
Correlations between gene expression patterns in response to DNA damage were investigated at the single-cell level.

Text 520
10.1038/s41592-020-0935-4
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 6 | second-strand synthesis reaction enhances the efficiency of scnt-seq. a, 2nd ss reaction workflow in scnt-seq. b, scatterplots comparing the number of genes (top) or umis (bottom) detected per cell as a function of aligned reads per cell between 4su (n=692 cells), tfea (n=447), 4su/ tfea (n=533), 4su/2nd ss (n=515), tfea/2nd ss (n=400) and 4su/tfea/2nd ss (n=795) experiments. 4su, metabolic labeling with 4su (100μm; 4h); tfea, on-bead tfea/naio4 chemical reaction. the fitted lines for each experiment and estimated numbers of genes or umis detected per cell at matching sequencing depth (50,000 reads per cell) for different experiments are shown. c, scatterplots showing pearson’s correlation for new and old rna abundances and ntrs between standard (4su/tfea) and 2nd ss (4su/tfea/2nd ss) scnt-seq protocols. levels of new and old rnas are in natural log transformation of (tp10k+1). d, pca plots showing k562 cells colored by cell-cycle states (top) or experiments (bottom).']. Reference sentences:[we reasoned that tfea/naio4 treatment may increase the failure rate of generating full-length cdnas (‘truncated’ cdnas in fig 6a) which is required for the ‘template-switching’ reaction to add the second pcr handle for cdna amplification (step 6 in fig 1a).to improve scnt-seq performance for 3′-tagged new transcript counting analysis we developed a random- primed second-strand synthesis (2nd ss) reaction to recover truncated cdna (fig 6a) and benchmarked the performance of this approach in human k562 cells.the 2nd ss reaction in scnt-seq (4su/tfea/2nd ss) was compat- ible with the analysis of t-to-c substitution (extended data fig 10a) and led to a 2.2-fold increase in the number of genes and a 4-fold increase in the number of umis detected per cell when compared to the standard scnt-seq protocol (4su/tfea) at matched sequencing depths (fig 6b).further comparisons indicated that the new and old rna levels and ntrs from the 2nd ss scnt-seq protocol were highly concordant with those derived from the standard protocol (fig 6c).all three experimen- tal protocols (drop-seq control: 4su/2nd ss; scnt-seq: 4su/tfea or 4su/tfea/2nd ss) readily revealed major cell-cycle phases using pca (fig 6d and extended data fig 10b).of umis per cell c new rnas old rnas 0 d −6 −3 0 3 6 pc2 g1 s g2m −6 −3 0 3 6 −10 −5 0 5 pc1 pc2 4su/tfea 4su/2nd ss 4su/tfea/2nd ss 4754 4su: tfea: 4su/tfea: 4su/2nd ss tfea/2nd ss 4su/tfea/2nd ss 2459 2789 7065 6660 6187 4su/tfea 4su/tfea/2nd ss ntrs 0.5 1.0 1.5 0 0.5 1.0 1.5 0 2.0 4.0 6.0 0 2.0 4.0 6.0 0 0.5 1.0 0 0.5 1.0 20 10 density 30 10 density 7.5 2.5 density pearson’s r = 0.91 pearson’s r = 0.92 pearson’s r = 0.88 16175 4su: tfea: 4su/tfea: 4su/2nd ss tfea/2nd ss 4su/tfea/2nd ss 4672 5239 31429 26237 20933 0 2500 5000 7500 0 10000 20000 30000 40000 50000 0 25000 50000 75000 fig 6 | second-strand synthesis reaction enhances the efficiency of scnt-seq.b. pca plots showing k562 cells colored by the total rna level of the top2a gene (natural log transformation of (tp10k + 1)) in three experimental protocols (same as in fig 6d).]
Patterns related to correlation between new and old RNA abundances and NTRs were highly concordant in scRNA-seq experiments with and without second-strand synthesis.

Text 521
10.1126/sciadv.aba1190
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 2. identification of diverse reprogramming subgroups and construction of reprogramming trajectories. (a) pcas showing subgroups present in d2 (left), d8 (middle), and d16+ (right) cells determined by rca, based on their correlation to cells of various lineages in the rca panel. each color represents a subgroup. gray color indicates the minority outlier cells, which do not belong to the indicated subgroups. (b) boxplots showing single-cell expression of the differentially expressed genes cdk1 (d2), gdf3 (d8), mmp2 (d16+), and lin28a (d16+) across the time points and their respective subgroups. lines represent the median expression. (c) left: trajectory of reprogramming cells constructed from the 10x scrna-seq libraries based on ddrtree dimension reduction. colors represent time points. right: pseudotime calculated by monocle. color indicates pseudotime. (d) stacked columns indicating the distribution of reprogramming time points across the pseudotemporal states. colors represent time points. (e) superimposition of d8 subgroups (left) and d16+ subgroups (right) on the trajectory of reprogramming. colors represent subgroups. (f) stacked columns revealing the distribution of d8 subgroups across the pseudotemporal states. colors represent d8 subgroups, and gray color indicates cells of the other time points. (g) superimposition of expression of the d8 subgroup-specific genes (rfc3 and gdf3) and the d16+ subgroup–specific genes (nanog, mmp2, and lin28a) on the reprogramming trajectories.']. Reference sentences:[d2 cells were marked by four distinct subgroups (g1 to g4) among which g1-2 cells displayed lower correlation to the fibroblasts and mesenchymal stem cells (mscs) (fig 2a and fig s2c).on the other hand d8 cells were distributed across three discrete subgroups (fig 2a and fig s2c).likewise two subpopulations were present in d16+ cells among which g2 cells were highly associated with pscs while g1 cells maintained detectable correlation to the mscs adipose cells and endothelial cells other than pscs (fig 2a and fig s2c).it includes cell cycle–associated genes such as cdk1 implicating the importance of cell cycle at the early stage of reprogramming which is in agreement with the previous study (fig 2b) (14).for instance dna replication factor rfc3 was vastly expressed in d8 g2-3 cells and pluripotent marker gdf3 was specifically expressed in the d8 g3 cells (fig 2b and table s1).on the other hand epithelial genes and pluripotent genes including cdh1 nanog and lin28a were specifically expressed in d16+ g2 cells (fig 2b and table s1).pseudotemporal trajectory of the reprogramming process we next analyzed 10x libraries to construct the trajectory (16 17) of cellular reprogramming which consisted of nine states and four branching events (fig 2c).notably pseudotime highly correlated with the actual reprogramming time points (fig 2 c and d).2020; 6 : eaba1190 11 september 2020 scie n c e a d v a nces | resea r ch a rt icl e 4 of 18 a b g c d e f fig 2.to answer we identified the rca subgroups from 10x libraries in the same manner as fluidigm scrna-seq libraries and superimposed the rca subgroup identities on the trajectory map (fig 2e and fig s3a).as for d8 subgroups g1 cells enriched across the states other than state 9 (successfully reprogrammed) whereas g3 cells were mostly found in state 9 (fig 2 e and f).on the other hand d8 g2 cells mainly belonged to states 4 and 9 (fig 2 e and f).intrigu- ingly state 4 (627 cells) composed almost entirely of d8 g2 (544 cells) (fig 2 e and f).expectedly d16+ g2 cells were the major constit- uents of state 9 whereas cells of d16+ g1 were enriched in both state 8 (non- reprogrammed) and state 9 corroborating their partial or non- reprogrammed identities (fig 2e and fig s3f).further subgroup-specific markers were expressed differentially along the pseudotime axis (fig 2g).rfc3 (d8 g2-3) gdf3 (d8 g3) and nanog and lin28a (d16+ g2) were expressed highly in the cells on the successful reprogramming trajectory whereas mmp2 (d16+ g1) showed the opposite trend (fig 2g).]
Patterns related to correlation between cells of different lineages and time points in reprogramming trajectory were shown. Subgroups and gene expressions were analyzed.

Text 522
10.1126/sciadv.aba1190
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 5. stage-specific tf regulatory networks of reprogramming. (a) heatmap showing the tfs’ expression across the pseudotime states. color code on top represents the pseudotime states. representative tfs of each category are listed on the right. (b) correlation between scatac-seq libraries based on the calculated jaspar motif deviations in the hars. side color bar indicates time points of the scatac-seq libraries. (c) plot indicating the significantly variable motifs in terms of accessibility in the scatac-seq libraries. y axis represents the variability score assigned to each jaspar motif, whereas x axis represents the motif rank. (d) scatac-seq heatmap based on the deviation scores of the significantly variable jaspar motifs. color code on top represents time points. motifs were classified to three major types according to the dynamics of accessibility across the time points. (e) t-sne plot of scatac-seq libraries based on the deviation scores of jaspar motifs. (f to i) superimposition of motif enrichment scores for oc motifs fosl1 and cebpa (f), transient motif gata1:tal1 (g), co motifs: type i-tead4 (h); type ii-foxl1 (i) on the t-sne plot. colors indicate the motif accessibility levels.']. Reference sentences:[to this end we performed dge analysis for tfs across the pseudotemporal states which were then categorized as early silenced late silenced transient early expressed and late expressed (fig 5a fig s7a and table s1).for example early silenced tfs (e.g. fosl1 creb3l1 ahrr drap1 and ell2) were mostly silenced in d8 bdd2-c8+ and d8 cd13− cells including cd13−cd201+ and cd13−cd201− cells (fig 5a and fig s7b).comparatively most of late silenced tfs were still highly expressed in the d8 bdd2-c8+ and not differentially expressed among d8 cd13 & cd201-sorted popula- tions (fig 5a and fig s7b).the majority of transient tfs exhibited higher expression in the d8 cd13+cd201+ and the d8 cd13− cd201+ populations whereas some lineage-associated factors such as hand1 (mesoderm) and asxl3 and neurog2 (neuroectoderm) were found to be highly expressed in the d8 cd13-cd201+ or the d8 cd13-cd201- cells (fig 5a and fig s7c).contrastingly early expressed tfs demonstrated higher expression in the d8 cd13− cd201− and the d8 cd13−cd201+ (fig 5a and fig s7d).notably the d8 cd13−cd201− cells expressed the highest levels of late expressed tfs such as prdm14 dnmt3b and lhx6 (fig 5a and fig s7d).next correlation of scatac-seq libraries among themselves resulted in three major clusters (fig 5b).the early cells consisting mostly of bj and d2 clustered together (cluster ii) while d8 d16+ and h1 cells shared a similar accessibility profile (cluster i) (fig 5b).a third cluster composed mainly of d8 and d16− cells (cluster iii) (fig 5b).we then used chromvar (29) to identify the tfs deter- mining the variable epigenome accessibility (fig 5c).notably chro- matins with motif sequences of tfs—such as fosl1 and its partners cebpa zeb1 pax6 sox8 sox10 oct4 and tead4—were found to be the most heterogeneous in terms of accessibility across the various time points of reprogramming cells and human embry- onic stem cells (hescs) (fig 5c and table s1).according to the dynamics of motif accessibility tfs were then categorized to oc (open in bj but close in d16+ and hesc) tran- sient and co (close in bj but open in d16+ and hesc) (fig 5d).in particular oc tfs belonged mostly to the fos-jun-ap1 complex such as fosl1 and jdp2 (jun dimerization protein 2) (fig 5 d to f and fig s7g).intriguingly motifs of lineage specifiers [mesendo- derm (me): gata1 sox8 and hnf4g; ectoderm (ect): pax6 nrl and rxr) were found to be accessible only in the intermedi- ate reprogramming cells but not in the hescs (fig 5 d e and g and fig s7h].on the contrary co type i tfs (e.g. tead4 and pou5f1) exhibited accessibility starting from the d8 reprogram- ming cells while co type ii tfs (e.g. foxl1 tcf4 and yy2) demonstrated accessibility in d16+ cells and escs exclusively (fig 5 d e h and i; and fig s7 i to k).2020; 6 : eaba1190 11 september 2020 scie n c e a d v a nces | resea r ch a rt icl e 10 of 18 b c d a e g i f h fig 5.]
Summary: Correlation patterns of TF expression and motif accessibility across different cell states during reprogramming.

Text 523
10.1016/j.ccell.2020.08.014
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 5. relationship between malignant cell identity and developmental cells of origin (a) heatmap showing correlation of all 160 programs derived from nmf analysis of individual patients with nb; nine highly correlated meta-programs are highlighted. (b) jaccard similarities of nine meta-programs (y axis) with the signatures of nine developing cell types (x axis). (c) heatmap showing mean similarity scores of each tumor corresponding to nine developing cell types. the clinical characteristics of all 16 patients, including age, sex, shimada histology, mycn status, inss stage, cog risk stratification, pathological histology, and grade of differentiation, are indicated as different']. Reference sentences:[we used hierarchical clustering to group all 160 identified signatures into nine main meta-programs (figure 5a).we found that several ma- lignant meta-programs had the most similar molecular features as chromaffin cells and sympathoblasts which suggested that tumor cells may be phenotypically closer to chromaffin cells or sympathoblasts (figure 5b).in this analysis we divided 106 target samples into three major groups (figure 5d).group a consisted of a small number of cases with a high scp-like signature which was also significantly associated with the pathological gnb sub- type (p < 0.05 figure 5e).we found similar results that primary nb tumors were largely uniform with a more differenti- ated noradrenergic/adrenergic cell phenotype (figure 5g).we searched for overlapping genes between signature genes of differentiated chromaffin cells and meta-program 3 which showed the most similarity to the chromaffin cell phenotype (figure 5b).the prediction scores corresponding to each cell type were then averaged to interpret the similarity between each tumor and developing cell types related to table s7a and figure 5c.the detailed gene list is shown in table s6 (related to figure 5d) and table s8 (related to figure 6a).]
Patterns of correlation between malignant cell identity and developmental cell types, highlighting similarities with chromaffin cells and sympathoblasts.

Text 524
10.1038/s41586-020-2734-6
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 4 | direct derivation of its cells from human fibroblasts. a, fdl representation of scrna-seq libraries of day-21 reprogramming intermediates (10,518 cells). b, te signatures on fdl projections. the te-like population is highlighted and coloured by library. c, experimental design of direct derivation of itscd8 from fibroblasts. d, phase-contrast image of itscd8. scale bar, 100 μm. e, immunostaining of itscd8 for several ts cell makers. scale bar, 100 μm. f, g, phase-contrast and immunostaining of st (f) and evt (g) cells differentiated from itscd8. scale bar, 100 μm. n = 4 for d–g. h, spearman correlation of transcriptomes from this study with published datasets7,30. biological replicates (n ≥ 2) are averaged before performing correlation. blast, blastocyst; blast/ct, blastocyst/cytotrophoblast; ct, cytotrophoblast. i, expression of mirnas of the chromosome 19 mirna cluster, normalized to']. Reference sentences:[the primed-like cell population prob- ably dominates over time which would explain the observed switch in the reprogramming branch at bulk level (extended data fig 4a b).a population of te-like cells was observed and closer examination revealed that this te-like population contained cells from all three reprogramming conditions (fig 4a b extended data fig 9b–d supplementary table 13).we noticed that the propor- tion of te-like population was the highest in ts cell medium as com- pared to fibroblast and naive media (fig 4b extended data fig 9d).therefore we hypothesized that we could derive its cell lines more efficiently by directly transitioning day-8 intermediates into ts cell medium (hereafter itscd8) without the need to expose the cells to naive medium or prolonged culturing in fibroblast medium (fig 4c).as seen in fig 4d itscd8 were successfully derived directly and our transgene-free itscd8 (extended data fig 10a) have demonstrated the capacity to undergo >50 passages thus far without a reduction in growth rate.this demonstrated that these itscd8 expressed key marker genes indicative of mononu- clear trophoblasts26 (fig 4e) and that they could differentiate into syncytiotrophoblasts and extravillous trophoblasts.the syncytio- trophoblasts expressed sdc1 displayed cell fusion and hcg secretion (fig 4f extended data fig 10b–e).extravillous trophoblasts were positive for the hla-a -b -c pan marker (w632) but not the hla-b marker and—importantly—they expressed hla-g (fig 4g extended data fig 10f–h).furthermore our its cells and its-cell-derived syncytiotrophoblasts and extravillous trophoblasts share a common transcriptomic profile with the corresponding primary cell types of other published data- sets727–30 (fig 4h extended data fig 10i–l supplementary table 14).its cells also show higher levels of expression of micrornas (mir- nas) from the chromosome 19 mirna cluster compared to fibroblast and ips cells—a unique feature of primary trophoblast26 (fig 4i).we observed specific open chromatin accessibility at the promoter and putative enhancer regions of the elf5 locus in its cells and in tscbt5 (which are derived from human blastocysts30) (fig 4j) that has previ- ously been found to be hypomethylated726.finally we showed that itscd8 could engraft into mouse tissues differentiate into the major trophoblast-lineage cell types of the placenta in vivo and secrete hcg in urine and serum (fig 4k–m extended data fig 10m).the values obtained were multiplied by 1000 and then the results were plotted in logarithmic scale26 (fig 4i).the same experimental procedure and the computational pipeline were also applied to generate the rset reprogramming scrna-seq library shown in extended data fig 4a b. scrna-seq of day-21 fibroblast naive and itscd8 reprogramming intermediates for extended data fig 9a day-21 fibroblast naive and itscd8 repro- gramming intermediates were collected and sorted for pi−tra-1-85+ cells to remove dead cells and imef cells.we found that the rset cells follow the naive trajec- tory but we also observed a primed-like cluster of cells expressing primed-associated markers such as zic2 and nlgn4x (extended data fig 4a b).for scrna-seq of rset repro- gramming specific library information can be found in extended data fig 4a and supplementary table 6.the total number of cells used in the final analysis (which included cells from the fm primed reprogramming and naive reprogramming libraries already mentioned) was 9852 (extended data fig 4).detailed cell numbers for scrna-seq in each figure are as follows: extended data fig 4a 9852 cells across 4 libraries (2402 fm cells 2506 primed reprogramming cells 2286 naive reprogramming cells and 2658 rset reprogramming cells).for scrna-seq of day-21 reprogramming intermediates specific library information can be found in fig 4a and supplementary table 13.the total number of cells used in the final analysis was 10518 (fig 4a b extended data fig 9b–e).for the spearman correlation comparisons the fpkm values were averaged across replicates before log2 transforma- tion (fig 4h extended data fig 10k l).for fig 4d e the experiments were repeated independently (n = 4 bio- logical replicates) with similar results and representative results are shown in the fig for fig 4f g the experiments were repeated with 4 its cell lines obtained from the two donors (independently differen- tiated into sts and evts) with similar results and representative images are shown in the figures (n = 4 biological replicates).for fig 4i the experiments were repeated with 4 independent cell lines (obtained from the two donors) and each of the 4 experiments were performed in 2 technical replicates with similar results and representative plots are shown in the figure (n = 4 biological replicates × 2 technical repli- cates).for fig 4k n = 3 independent cell lines were injected to three mice and similar results were obtained and a representative image is shown.for fig 4l the serum of two independent experiments (2 its cell lines injected 1 line per mouse) were measured in 2 technical rep- licates (n = 2 biological replicates × 2 technical replicates).represent- ative results are shown in the fig for fig 4m 4 lesions were generated collected and analysed similar results were obtained and representative images are shown (n = 4 biological replicates).article extended data fig 4 | single-cell profiling of the reprogramming pathway into naive rset state.the cell population not enriched for epi signatures but enriched for te signatures is indicated by a purple arrow related to fig 4b.]
Summary: Correlation patterns between transcriptomes from different datasets, including expression of specific miRNAs and open chromatin accessibility.

Text 525
10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.119.044557
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 6. rcf markers expression correlates with cardiac function in infarcted pigs and is']. Reference sentences:[an rcf-like expression signature is detected in a pre-clinical model of mi and in human cardiac fibrotic tissue to assess the translational potential of our findings we examined whether the rcf signature can be detected in a preclinical pig model of mi (figure 6a).consistent with murine data cthrc1+ cells localized to the iz but not to the rz in the same region where deposits of col1α1 and postn were found (figure 6c).cthrc1 expression was lower at 180dpi in comparison with 8 and 60 dpi (figure 6b) with no cthrc1+ cells detected at 180dpi by immunohistochemistry (data not shown).to assess the relation between the expression of cthrc1 and cardiac function we compared the level of expression of cthrc1 in the iz between animals with mid-range preserved (>45%) and reduced (≤45%) ejection fraction (ef) 40 at 180dpi (n=12 versus n=9 respectively) (figure 6d).despite the critical role of cthrc1 in the early stages after mi we found that at later stages (180dpi) the level of cthrc1 (bz iz) was significantly higher in the group with cardiac dysfunction (figure 6e).consequently a negative correlation between the ef and the expression of cthrc1 col1α1 and postn in the iz was found (figure 6e) which was only statistically significant for cthrc1 and col1α1.additionally a positive and significant correlation between the infarct area and expression levels were observed for cthrc1 and postn but not for col1α1 (figure 6f and 6g).several genes of the rcf transcriptomic signature (cthrc1 ptm fmod) were significantly overexpressed in all the pathological conditions included in this study compared to controls as shown in the barplots from figure 6h.moreover cthrc1+ cf were found in the iz but not in rz of infarcted hearts from patients (figure 6i).]
Patterns of correlation between cthrc1 expression and cardiac function in infarcted pigs, with significant associations with fibrotic markers.

Text 526
10.1681/ASN.2020060806
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 3. scrna-seq analysis identifies 12 discrete myeloid cell clusters, with dynamic changes in the proportion of cells assigned to each cluster across the r-uuo model. (a) tsne plot of 2956 pooled myeloid cells from each time point, annotated by cell type and time point. (b) top five immgen reference immune cell types correlating with each cluster, ranked by spearman correlation coefficients after a cluster-to-references analysis using cluster identify predictor version 2. (c) violin plots showing the expression levels of selected']. Reference sentences:[scrna-seq reveals myeloid heterogeneity during injury and repair our previous data in the kidney and liver suggest a pivotal role for the plasticity of myeloid cells in injury and repair.2353 to further characterize the myeloid cell heterogeneity and phe- notype we repeated the snn clustering specifically on mye- loid cells partitioning these cells into 12 clusters (figure 3a).we first assigned clusters as monocytes macrophages or dcs by generating spearman correlation values for each cluster as compared with gene signatures of mouse immune cells obtained from immgen (figure 3b supplemental figure 3 a and c).we then refined this classification using cluster- defining de genes (supplemental figure 3b supplemental table 7) and the following genes encoding cell surface protein markers that define specific myeloid cell subsets on ﬂow cy- tometry: itgam (cd11b) adgre1 (f4/80) fcgr1 (cd64) itgax (cd11c) and h2-aa (mhcii) (figure 3 c and d).a third cluster uniquely expressed arg1 (figure 3 c and d) and additionally markers of ly6c1 inﬂammatory monocytes including ccr2 chil3 and f13a1 although not ly6c2 (figures 3d and 4b).these arg11 cells were exclu- sively present at uuo-2 (figure 3 a and e) and the profi- brotic gene expression suggested they may initiate fibrosis by interacting with mesenchymal cells.macrophages adopt differing phenotypes during injury and resolution phases we identified five clusters (figure 3b) that expressed genes consistent with macrophage identity including those encod- ing csf1 receptor (csf1r) mhcii (h2-aa) and cd81 a con- served marker of renal macrophages (figure 3 c and d).24 we define a first cluster as quiescent resident macrophages marker genes in each cluster.the mrc11 cells expressed multiple scavenger receptors (mrc1 fcrls stab1) suggesting a role in scavenging debris/excess ecm (figure 3d).cells in this cluster expressed ccr2 (figure 3d) raising the possibility they may be derived from ly6c1/ccr21 monocytes that are recruited to the injured kidney before transitioning to adopt a transcriptome highly similar to resident macrophages (figures 3 c and d and 5b).a fourth cluster was uniquely characterized by expression of ifn-stimulated genes (figure 3 c and d).in addition the mmp121 cluster–expressed genes implicated in efferocytosis and lipid transport suggest- ing they may be involved in clearance of apoptotic cells (supplemental figure 3d).although the mmp121 cells mapped to mac- rophages on the immgen databases (figure 3b) they mor- phologically resembled monocytes and expressed low levels of f4/80 (figure 5c) but high levels of ccr2 (figure 3c).dcs adopt a migratory phenotype during late-stage injury and resolution we assigned three clusters as dcs expressing mhc genes (h2-aa) but not macrophage markers (cd81 c1q; figure 3d).one cluster expressed itgae (encodes cd103) whereas another expressed cd209a consistent with type 1 and type 2 conventional dcs (cdc1 cdc2) respectively.24 cdc1s and cdc2s were proportionally fewer in uuo-7 before returning during r-uuo (figure 3 a and e).in contrast the third dc cluster which expressed ccr7 was not detected in sham animals but appeared by uuo-7 and persisted through r-uuo (figure 3 a and e).this cluster mapped specifically to lymph node dcs in the immgen database (supplemental figure 3a).in combination with the trajectory analysis and ﬂow cytometry data these data suggest donor monocytes are recruited selectively to the obstructed kidney by uuo-2 tran- sition to a ccr2hi macrophage by uuo-7 and hence are the likely source of the cells in the ccr21 macrophage cluster ob- served at uuo-7 in the scrna-seq dataset (figure 3a).supplemental figure 3.single cell rna-seq table of differentially expressed genes in the myeloid only data as described in figure 3 expressed per cluster.]
Patterns related to correlation between myeloid cell clusters and immune cell types are shown in the figure.

Text 527
10.1016/j.celrep.2020.108222
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 2. eb differentiation recapitulates the developmental trajectory of the pre-gastrulation embryo (a) plot comparing real-time point of collection (y axis) with pseudotime score (x axis) for the same 1,536 single cells from figure 1 (points). cells are color coded by cell-state annotations from figure 1. we identify a population of pre-epib cells with arrested differentiation (orange dots, black outline). (b) pseudotime trajectory as in figure 1b, with a magnified view of the cells with arrested differentiation (orange dots, black outline). these cells fall at the branchpoint of escs (red), pre-epib cells (orange), and post-epib cells (lime green). (c) plot showing differentially expressed genes in the cell population with arrested differentiation. the top differentially expressed genes (36 genes, àlog(p) > 5.8, fold change > 1.2) are highlighted (red). top differentially expressed genes include many pgc marker genes. we therefore annotated the population of cells with arrested differentiation as pgc like. (d) heatmap showing unbiased clustering of meta-modules based on the top 30 differentially expressed genes from the single-cell transcriptomes of cells annotated as pgc like (yellow) or pre-epib (orange). the top differentially expressed genes for each cluster are annotated (p < 1eà3). (e) heatmap showing a correlation analysis of the annotated eb cell states with gene expression data from bulk rna-seq from isolated populations in vivo (geo: gse76505; zhang et al., 2018).']. Reference sentences:[the pseudotime score for individual cells correlated well with the actual time points of collection with some notable exceptions (figure 2a).this suggested that these cells were arrested in their differentiation (figure 2a; star methods).we therefore annotated this cluster as pgc-like cells (figure 2d).cell reports 33 108222 october 6 2020 3 article ll open access figure 2.we correlated the aggregated rna profiles of our assigned cell lineages with annotated in vivo populations from prior bulk and single-cell studies (figure 2e; boroviak et al. 2015; nestorowa et al. 2016; seisenberger et al. 2012; zhang et al. 2018; star methods).next we compared eb-derived pgc- like cells with isolated embryonic tissues at various stages (bor- oviak et al. 2015; magnu´ sdo´ ttir et al. 2013; seisenberger et al. 2012; zhang et al. 2018) which suggested that eb-derived pgc-like cells share transcriptional programs with e4.5 preim- plantation epiblast cells and pgcs isolated from e11.5 embryos (figure 2f).bottom left: reproduction of the pseudotime trajectory plot from figure 2d depicting the branchpoint between pre-epib cells (orange) pgc-like cells (yellow) and post-epib cells (lime green; which become the ps dark green).]
Correlation between pseudotime and actual time points, identifying pgc-like cells arrested in differentiation, and correlation with in vivo populations.

Text 528
10.1016/j.jaut.2020.102547
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 2. inflammatory gene module in cd16+ monocytes is important for the discrimination of ssc. (a) top 10 modules that discriminate ssc from hc. iwgcna analysis identified 204 gene modules in 19 immune cell subsets and ranked them by random forest mean decreased gini index. (b) cd16+ monocyte (cd16p_mono) m5 module eigengene (me) expression in hc and ssc. error bars represent standard deviations. (c) ipa upstream regulator analysis of cd16p_mono_m5 module genes. top 15 activation upstream regulators are shown. (d) correlation network of top 10 modules (a). two module nodes with spearman’s correlation coefficients >0.8 are connected with a line. module size is proportional to the discriminant importance in random forest analysis (a). overall network is shown in supple\\xad mentary fig 3.']. Reference sentences:[those modules were ranked according to the mean gini decrease to prioritize which co- expressed genes were important in the discrimination (fig 2a).the eigengenes the representa- tive expression value of the module cd16p_mono_m5 was significantly higher in monocytes from ssc than those from hcs (fig 2b).by up- stream regulator analysis pro-inflammatory cytokines and growth fac- tors were identified as the upstream regulators of this module (fig 2c).the correlation of clinical parameters and the expression of eigengenes of the cd16+ monocyte modules were also analyzed (supplementary fig 2).importantly by correla- tion analysis the top modules for distinguishing ssc from hcs with random forest were strongly correlated to each other (correlation coef- ficient > 0.80 fig 2d supplementary fig 3) and upstream regulator analysis revealed almost identical regulators (data not shown).]
Patterns of correlation between top gene modules in immune cell subsets for discriminating between healthy controls and systemic sclerosis.

Text 529
10.1038/s41586-020-2821-8
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 3 | stimulus-to-cell-type mapping reveals neuron types tuned to distinct thirst states. a, experimental design for identifying active neurons under distinct thirst states. scrna-seq was performed in the presence of actinomycin d, a transcriptional blocker. activated neuron types were mapped based on ieg expression. b, neuronal data from the sfo (top) and the ovlt (bottom) under four physiological conditions were aligned using canonical correlation analysis and displayed in a umap embedding (n = 6,540 and n = 7,206 neurons for the sfo and the ovlt, respectively). the expression of fos is plotted on a log-normalized scale as a proxy for neural activation (red).']. Reference sentences:[our analysis also revealed the gene expression pat- terns of previously proposed osmosensory ion channels peptide hormones and hormone receptors that have been implicated in fluid homeostasis11920 (extended data fig 3).we performed scrna-seq experiments in the presence of a transcription blocker under four different conditions: sated osmotic stress hypovol- aemic stress and water deprivation (fig 3a).almost no ieg expression was observed in sated animals in any neuron types whereas most excitatory neurons exhibited robust fos expression after water deprivation81023 (fig 3b c).interestingly we found different sets of neuron types activated under osmotic and hypovolaemic thirst (fig 3c extended data fig 4e).importantly natural water deprivation activated both hyperosmolality- and hypovolaemia-sensitive cell types (fig 3c).fos data are replotted for reference from fig 3b.extended data fig 3 | see next page for caption.article extended data fig 3 | expression of putative osmoregulatory channels or hormone receptors and cellular comparison between the sfo and the ovlt.]
Summary: Correlation patterns between neural activation (proxied by fos expression) and thirst states in different neuron types were identified using canonical correlation analysis.

Text 530
10.1038/s41590-020-0799-x
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 1 | scrna-seq reveals heterogeneous subpopulations within lmpps. a, bm from c57bl/6 mice was enriched for c-kit+ cells, stained with a panel of antibodies, and then single c-kithisca-1+ cells were index sorted by facs into 384-well plates for scrna-seq using a version of cel-seq2. b, heat map of marker gene expression (lower rows) for each cluster identified using sc3, where columns are cells and rows are genes, with columns ordered by cluster id. single cells are later annotated for expression levels of surface markers indexed at the time of sorting by facs, as well as transcriptional similarity to the indicated population rna-seq data from immgen (upper rows). these clusters are manually labeled as lymphoid-, mep-, myeloid-, stem-like and mixed, on the basis of their transcriptional signature. dach1 is highlighted. c, transcriptional clusters 1–4 visualized on a two-dimensional plot for surface flt3 (cd135) and cd150, with the hspc populations that they could correspond to indicated. d, dach1 is a gene highly expressed in the stem- and myeloid-like clusters but not in the lymphoid-like cluster. based on single cell gene expression, the most and least correlated genes are indicated.']. Reference sentences:[17) (methods; fig 1a).18) we observed distinct transcriptional signatures within hspcs (fig 1b).first to visual- ize and cross-correlate these clusters with phenotypic markers we annotated cells with the relative fluorescence level of the indicated markers (fig 1b).as seen in fig 1b distinct clusters of genes and cells were identified: cluster 1 (lymphoid-like) cluster 2 (megakaryocyte/erythroid progenitor (mep)-like) cluster 6 8 10 12 4 6 8 10 flt3 dntt il12a satb1 dhrs3 cd52 notch1 ncf1 il1r1 elovl6 aqp1 slc25a21 atp1b2 blvrb klf1 gata1 car1 mns1 cox6b2 myo1d mpo atp8b4 ccl9 f630028o10rik rab44 prtn3 ctsg irf8 clec12a tyrobp gata2 slc18a2 csgalnact1 dach1 muc13 mpl esam shank3 stard4 plxdc2 lt-hsc st-hsc mep cmp clp gmp cd150 cd135 cd127 cd16/32 0 2 4 6 8 1.notably we found that cells from clusters 1 (lymphoid-like) and 3 (myeloid-like) could be identified within lmpps (fig 1c).dach1 was substantially expressed in the myeloid- and stem-like fractions but not in the lymphoid cluster and therefore represented a gene that could potentially demarcate functional lmpp heterogeneity (fig 1b).the top correlated and anti-correlated genes for dach1 in our single-cell dataset included a strong posi- tive correlation with myeloid- and stem-like genes (for example gata2 meis1 angpt1) and inverse correlation with lymphoid genes (for example dntt satb1 and flt3) (fig 1d).furthermore when dach1 expression was assessed within immune rna-seq data from immgen19 and haemosphere20 its expression was largely restricted to granulocytes (neutrophils eosinophils basophils and mast cells) and the megakaryocyte/erythroid lineages but not other mature lineages (extended data fig 1).on the basis of scrna-seq data (fig 1) combined with the observed heterogeneity in dach1 expression in vivo (fig 2bc) we predicted that the transcriptionally ‘lymphoid-like’ dach1–gfp− lmpps could represent a unique population we putatively refer to as lymphoid-primed progenitors (lpps).considering the correlation of dach1 expression with stem (cluster 4) and myeloid (cluster 3) genes (fig 1d) and our descrip- tion of a putative dach1–gfp− lpp we explored the possibility that dach1–gfp expression patterns may correlate with the known fig 2 | dach1–gfp expression among hspc subpopulations.we then further investigated; first whether the transcriptionally unique ‘lymphoid-like’ fraction of lmpps (cluster 1 in fig 1b) was enriched in the putative dach1–gfp− lpp fraction (fig 2c); second and vice versa whether the lpp fraction represented a bona fide transcrip- tionally unique subpopulation that was distinct from dach1–gfp+ lmpps and clps; and third whether a putative developmental rela- tionship existed between lpps clps and other progenitors.similar to cluster 1 in fig 1b we again identified a lymphoid-primed cluster within lsks (cluster 2; fig 4ab) that highly and uniquely expressed lymphoid-like signature genes including il12a notch1 dntt satb1 and ncf1 (fig 4ac and supplementary table 1).the latter population may represent a het- erogeneous population of a putative immediate myeloid-primed progenitors and a fraction of genuine late-contributing lymphoid and myeloid oligopotent progenitors (fig 1).for the scrna-seq data generated in fig 1 we used 96 indexed polydt primers with a 6n unique molecular identifier (umi) sequence followed by an 8-bp index sequence (inhouse design) and the illumina truseq adaptor sequences: cgattgaggccggtaatacgactcactatagggcagacgtgtgct cttccgatctnnnnnnacttggcattttttttttttttttttttv).for data presented in fig 1: 11 µl of second-strand reaction mix was added (invitrogen second-strand buffer at 1× final concentration 3.5 u dna polymerase i (escherichia coli) (invitrogen 18010–025) 0.2 u rnase h (e. coli) (invitrogen 18021–071 0.9 u e. coli dna ligase (invitrogen 18052–019) 2.5 mm dntp mix (neb n0447s) depc water (thermo fisher scientific am9920)).for data shown in fig 1 the 5′-tagged random hexamer rt (ranhexrt) primer consists of a partial illumina truseq adaptor sequence and an additional 8-bp index sequence (ctacacgacgctcttccgatctcatcgtcgnnnnnn) for pool-level indexing.for fig 1 data were pre-processed by scpipe (v.1.3.0)46.a total of five clusters were generated by sc3 (v.1.1.5) with marker genes identified and plotted in fig 1a.the correlatepairs function in scran (v.1.0.0)48 was used to find gene that correlate with dach1 expression and genes with false discovery rate <0.05 were selected and plotted in fig 1d.data exclusions for scrnaseq dataset in fig 1 low quality cells were removed using the criteria that cells that had < 5000 unique molecular identifier (umi) counts were removed and genes were kept for further analysis only if they were expressed in more than 3 cells and with more than 10 umi counts.]
Summary: Single-cell transcriptomics reveals correlation patterns between dach1 expression and stem/myeloid genes, distinguishing lymphoid-like cells within lmpps.

Text 531
10.1016/j.cell.2020.09.056
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 3. cis regulation determines dorcs (a) schematic depicting an analytical framework for analysis of distal regulatory elements and expression of genes. (b) number of peak-gene associations after down-sampling the number of cells or reads in the gm12878 share-seq dataset. reads are down-sampled to match the number of reads recovered to match those obtained by sci-car (cao et al., 2018). (c) loops denote the p value of chromatin accessibility of each peak and dlx3 rna expression ( ± 500 kb from tsss). loop height represents the significance of the correlation. h3k4me1 and h3k27ac chip-seq tracks and super-enhancer annotation were generated from an isolated tac population (adam et al., 2015). grey bars denote scatac-seq peaks. blue bars denote peaks that are significantly associated with the dlx3 gene. the magnified tracks show the aggregated atac-seq data of each cluster. (d and e) the number of significant peak-gene associations for all genes (d) and previously defined (adam et al., 2015) super-enhancer genes (e). (f) the number of significantly correlated peaks (p < 0.05) for each gene ( ± 50 kb from tsss). known super-enhancer-regulated genes are highlighted. (g) representative dorcs for each cluster; values are normalized by the min and max activity. (h) the peak counts of all dlx3 correlated peaks (left) and dlx3 gene expression (right) colored in umap. the arrows point to regions with differential signals.']. Reference sentences:[to test this we developed an analyt- ical framework to link distal peaks to genes in cis based on the co-variation in chromatin accessibility and gene expression across cells while controlling for technical biases in chromatin accessibility measurements (figure 3a; figure s3; star methods).for example 22 peaks were significantly associated (within ± 50 kb around tsss p < 0.05) with dlx3 highly expressed in tacs (figure 3c; adam et al. 2015).further regions with a high density of peak-gene associations significantly overlapped known super-enhancers (adamet al.2015; figure 3c; table s5; 2.1-fold enrichment p = 10=238 hypergeometric test)— enhancer regions that are cell-type-specific and highly enriched in histone h3k27 acetylation (whyte et al. 2013).layer infundibulum tac-1 tac-2 irs medulla cuticle/cortex ors 101 1 020 0 120 0 101 0 011 0 213 1 tac irs ors medulla cuticle cortex 0 5k 10k 15k 1 2 3 4 number of peak-genes associations share-seq p<0.01 share-seq p<0.05 downsample p<0.01 downsample p<0.05 gm12878 log10(cell number) figure 3. cis regulation determines dorcs (a) schematic depicting an analytical framework for analysis of distal regulatory elements and expression of genes.dorcs identify key lineage-determining genes de novo we define the 857 regions with an exceptionally large (>10) num- ber of significant peak-gene associations as dorcs identified as those exceeding an inﬂection point (‘‘elbow’’) when ranking genes by the number of significant associations (figure 3f).moreover dorcs were strongly enriched for known key regulators of lineage commitment across the expected line- ages (figure 3g; figure s3q).for example although dlx3 dorc and dlx3 gene expression were active in tac/irs/ medulla cells this was not the case in cuticle/cortex cells where the dlx3 dorc is active and the dlx3 gene is not highly ex- pressed (figure 3h; figure s3t).cis associations overlap with known super-enhancers and are gene and cell stage specific related to figure 3 (a) distribution of peak-gene associations relative to tsss in gm12878 cell line data.]
Patterns of correlation between chromatin accessibility peaks and gene expression, particularly around transcription start sites, identifying key lineage-determining genes.

Text 532
10.1016/j.cell.2020.09.056
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure s4. lineage priming validation and characterization, related to figure 4 (a) the scatterplot of the tubb6 dorc score and tubb6 gene expression. (b) distribution of residual and spearman correlation of dorc to expression of dorc-regulated genes across cells in the hair shaft lineage. (c) change of aggregated chromatin accessibility profiles and aggregated rna profiles over pseudotime. loops denote the p-value of chromatin accessibility of each peak and wnt3 rna expression. loop height represents the significance of the correlation. grey bars denote scatac-seq peaks. blue bars denote peaks that are significantly associated with the wnt3 gene. the inset shows a zoom-in image of aggregated chromatin accessibility around wnt3 locus. (d) hierarchical clustering of chromatin accessibility peak and expression of associated genes for the hair shaft lineage. cells are ordered by pseudotime.']. Reference sentences:[]
Summary: Correlation patterns between chromatin accessibility and gene expression in the hair shaft lineage cells are shown, with significant associations highlighted.

Text 533
10.1038/s41467-020-19234-6
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 2 the p0 ife basal cell layer contains two distinct cell populations. a expression heatmap of unique gene signatures for each of the two basal ife clusters. blue arrows highlight select differentially expressed genes between the two basal clusters. gene lists in supplementary data 1. b expression level of select genes, which are enriched in either ife.b1 or ife.b2, projected onto tsne for the two basal clusters. c heatmap showing the correlation between cells for sc3 clustering (1, 2; red, blue) and seurat clustering (ife.b1, ife.b2; purple, green). d rna-fish for wnt4 in the p0 ife. white arrowheads, wnt4high cells; blue arrowheads, wnt4-low cells; white broken line, basal lamina; e epidermis, d dermis, hf hair follicle. scale bar = 10 µm, representative image for n = 5.']. Reference sentences:[ife.b1 cells (446 cells) express h19 igf2 and wnt4 at a higher level than ife.b2 cells whereas ife.b2 cells (556 cells) exclusively express sox4 and fst as well as other markers including dcn (fig 2a b).we per- formed principle component analysis (pca) on these two populations and found the above markers to be among the genes that explain most of the variances in the first pc (supplementary fig 2a); in contrast cell cycle genes do not contribute to var- iances in the first few pcs.to confirm that active cell cycling does not play a major role in defining the two basal clusters we also regressed out the cell cycle genes and reclustered the basal ife cells which did not alter the results (supplementary fig 2b–d).furthermore ife.b1 and b2 are not distinct stages of differentiation on the pseudotime trajectory (supplementary fig 2e).in addition we used an independent clustering method sc315 to recluster all basal ife cells; sc3 clustering results were very similar to seurat’s confirming the robustness of this finding (fig 2c).we found that wnt4-high and wnt4-low cells are distributed heterogeneously within the ife basal layer (fig 2d) and that high h19 expression tends to co- localize with the wnt4-high cells (supplementary fig 2f).]
Correlation between two distinct cell populations in single-cell transcriptomics, highlighted by differential gene expression and clustering analysis.

Text 534
10.1038/s41586-020-2879-3
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 1 | high-resolution transcriptomic atlases of the optic lobe across development. a, cross-section of the optic lobe3, with drawings of unicolumnar (orange shades) and multicolumnar (blue) neurons. the dashed lines indicate the boundaries between layers. a, anterior; l, lateral; m, medial; p, posterior. b, schematic of the approach followed to produce the adult dataset. c, pearson correlation between the average gene expression of the adult dataset clusters (x axis) and the transcriptome of isolated lawf1 neurons (methods). d, t-sne visualization of the final adult dataset, using 120 principal components calculated on the log-normalized integrated gene expression.']. Reference sentences:[the visual information detected by the pho- toreceptors is integrated in the four neuropils of the optic lobe—lamina medulla lobula and lobula plate (fig 1a)—which are each divided into around 750 columns corresponding to the approximately 750 omma- tidia in the compound eye.to produce an exhaustive catalogue of neurons in the adult optic lobe (fig 1a b) we obtained 109743 single-cell tran- scriptomes (methods) using the chromium system (10x genomics).we used the seurat v.3 integration pipeline21 to remove batch effects between libraries (extended data fig 1a b methods).we then tested the statistical significance of the clusters and merged improperly sepa- rated clusters that did not display biologically relevant differences in gene expression resulting in 193 final clusters (extended data fig 1c–f supplementary table 1 methods).a clear match between a cell type and a cluster should result in an obvious correlation gap between the best and the second-best matches (fig 1c).in summary we were able to identify 61 of our 172 neuronal clusters (fig 1d).we sequenced optic lobe cells at five pupal stages (around 30000 cells at each stage; methods) covering all stages of neuronal differentiation (fig 1e).because developing neurons most often lack marker genes or available bulk transcriptomes we adopted a supervised approach to annotate these datasets (fig 1f).because of the smaller sample sizes of the pupal datasets we used a multi-task extension of our neural network (fig 1f) to prevent overfit- ting the classifiers (methods).a umap visualization of the p15 dataset (parameters as in fig 1d).this generalizes observations that have previously been made in photoreceptors3940 (supplementary discus- sion) and implies that all brain-wiring steps beyond initial neuropil targeting—that is axon pathfinding; fig 1e—are executed synchro- nously in the optic lobe.many of the p50 subcluster mark- ers turned off or lost their specificity in adult brains (extended data fig 10a) which explains why t4–t5 subtypes were transcriptionally indistinguishable in adult brains (fig 1d).gene ontology analysis of these markers revealed exclusive enrichment for cell-surface-receptor terms involved in cell adhesion and axon or dendrite development (extended data fig 10b c).d e summary of gene ontology (go) enrichment analysis performed on the stage markers for biological processes (d) and molecular function (e) (extended data fig 11a).analysis of the medulla connectome4 revealed that the two dm3 subtypes connect differentially to several postsynaptic partners (extended data fig 10d methods).consist- ently the number of differentially expressed genes between subgroups peaked around p50 and decreased sharply thereafter (extended data fig 10e).at all stages this consistently revealed overwhelming enrichment for receptor binding and activity terms related to axon or dendrite development and synapse formation followed by transcription factor and ion-channel terms (extended data fig 11a).we performed gene ontology analysis on ‘stage markers’—genes that were upregulated in neurons at a particular time point as compared to all other stages (meth- ods extended data fig 11b).this suggests that as a general principle the upregulation of cell-surface molecules necessary to enable synaptic specificity around p50 (fig 1e) causes a peak of transcriptional diversity.sparse labelling of individual tm9 neurons did not reveal any obvious morphological differences between these subtypes (extended data fig 12a).we also noticed that wnt4-gal4 expression was restricted to the ventral photoreceptors r7 and r8 in pupae but not in adult flies (fig 5a b extended data fig 12b c).we found two other neurons with dorsoventral asymmetries: tm4 neurons and the unidentified cluster 62 could be separated into wnt4+ and wnt10+ popu- lations with only ventral tm4 neurons overlapping with wnt4-gal4 expression (extended data fig 12d e).despite this similar- ity wnt4+ and wnt10+ neurons differentially expressed several genes throughout development (extended data fig 12f).in brief we first dis- sected adult optic lobes then dissociated tissue while maintaining cell viability and finally sorted cells by facs (facs aria iii) on the basis of their differences in fluorescence intensity and cell size (supplementary fig 1).this procedure conserved the local structure of each dataset as the cells shared on average 81% of their closest neighbours before and after integration and efficiently removed the batch effects as our final adult clusters contained a uni- form distribution of cells from each original library (extended data fig 1b).we varied the pc number between 100 and 200 (with a step size of 20) and the resolution between 1 and 15 (step size of 1) which yielded between 146 and 229 clusters (extended data fig 1c).the results are presented in extended data fig 1d.statistical significance of the clusters because keeping small clusters separate using a modularity optimiza- tion algorithm results in artificially splitting large clusters47 before annotation of the adult dataset we merged all pairs of clusters that were improperly separated (extended data fig 1e f).similarly we used the seurat v2 function buildclustertree on the t4/t5 subtypes (extended data fig 10) and the function assessnodes to evaluate the statistical significance of the separation between several pairs of clusters throughout this study (dm3a and dm3b tm9v and tm9d tm4v and tm4d cluster 62 wnt4+wnt10− and wnt4−wnt10+ cells) and during the process of annotating the pupal stages (see section ‘backprojection of the developmental splits’).all neuronal types except pm3 lc6 lc10b lc16 and lpi3–4 displayed a clear match to a single cluster as evidenced by an obvious correlation gap (of at least 0.05) between the best and second-best cluster matches (fig 1c extended data fig 3a).however because some of those genes are biologically relevant and clearly differentially expressed (fig 5 extended data fig 12) the division into wnt4+ and wnt10+ subtypes is genuine.we therefore designed a multi-task neural network architecture that was able to use all available labelled data for training while still preserv- ing the highest relevance of the immediately following stage (fig 1f).we also calculated the number of differentially expressed genes (with an adjusted p value of <0.01) between these subtypes at all stages (extended data fig 10e); note that all groups were subsetted to 150 cells in this analysis for consistency.subclustering of t4–t5 neurons even though the subtype divisions of t4 and t5 neurons are well char- acterized both functionally and developmentally42 the unsupervised divisions within this cluster in the adult dataset were largely based on technical variation (extended data fig 1f) and were merged.we were able to obtain eight clusters that corresponded to the known subtypes (see sec- tion ‘increased diversity at synaptogenesis’) and calculated the marker genes between them (extended data fig 10a).of these marker genes 332 (about half of the total at each stage) were shared between all pupal and adult stages and as a result go terms largely overlapped as well (extended data fig 11a).the treemap tables were then exported from revigo and inputted to the python pack- age cirgo54 to create the summary graphs in extended data fig 11.to produce the fig 4 plots for each stage the percentage enrichment of each summary term as determined by revigo (inner rings in extended data fig 11) was manually combined into eight super-terms for ‘biological process’ and seven super-terms for ‘molecular function’ and plotted accordingly.extended data fig 1 | see next page for caption.article extended data fig 1 | batch effect removal and biological relevance of the adult clusters.clusters 38 85 102 and 120 present much less defined gene expression patterns and probably contain low-quality neuronal transcriptomes (see also extended data fig 1).cells colours indicate the clusters they belonged to according to unsupervised clustering (a) or the adult clusters they were classified as by the neural network (b same as in fig 1e).article extended data fig 10 | see next page for caption.extended data fig 10 | increased transcriptomic diversity during synaptogenesis.article extended data fig 11 | go enrichment analysis of the cluster and stage markers.extended data fig 12 | see next page for caption.article extended data fig 12 | dorsal and ventral visual circuits are partitioned by differential wnt signalling.]
Patterns related to correlation between gene expression in adult dataset clusters and isolated neurons were analyzed.

Text 535
10.1038/s41586-020-2879-3
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 4 | increased transcriptomic diversity during synaptogenesis. a, t-sne visualizations of t4 and t5 neurons, using 20 principal components calculated on the log-normalized integrated gene expression, across development. b, r25f07(dm3)-gal4 sparse expression at p50 with anti-bi staining (n = 10 brains). yellow and cyan arrows (arrowheads) indicate dendrites (cell bodies) of a posterior–ventrally and a posterior–dorsally oriented dm3, respectively. scale bar, 5 μm. c, plot of the highest pearson correlation between each neuronal cluster (n = 175) and all other neuronal clusters, at each stage, using all genes belonging to the top10 cluster markers of at least one stage. p < 0.001']. Reference sentences:[in addition we iden- tified the clusters corresponding to lc12 lc14 lc17 pm1 t2a tmy4 tmy8 and tmy14 neurons using the binarized expression (methods) of combinations of protein markers identified by antibody or reporter-line stainings (extended data fig 4 supplementary table 1).however supervised annotation and subclustering of t4–t5 cells (fig 4a methods) showed that a and b subtypes could be separated from c and d subtypes at all stages.immunostainings against bifid (bi also known as omb)—which was differentially expressed between the dm3 subclusters—showed that the dendrites of the bi+ dm3b cells were always oriented posterior–dorsally whereas those of bi− dm3a cells were oriented posterior–ventrally (n > 100 fig 4b).even though t4 and t5 dm3 and tm9 may represent extreme cases this increased transcriptional diversity during synapse forma- tion is indeed a general phenomenon: pearson correlations between the average gene expression profiles of clusters that are most similar to each other were significantly lower between p40 and p70 across all neuronal clusters (fig 4c).cell-surface-molecule terms involved in synaptogenesis and membrane potential were particularly upregulated around p50–p70 (fig 4d e) which explains the increased diversity at these stages.the identification of clusters without comparison to a reference transcriptome was primarily done using mixture modelling of known markers (extended data fig 4) and is detailed in length for each cluster in supplementary table 1 extended data fig 4.at p50 however all eight subtypes could be separately observed already in the t-sne plot (fig 4a extended data fig 7c).to produce the fig 4 plots for each stage the percentage enrichment of each summary term as determined by revigo (inner rings in extended data fig 11) was manually combined into eight super-terms for ‘biological process’ and seven super-terms for ‘molecular function’ and plotted accordingly.as we did not see clear differences in the average normal- ized inputs between subtypes (besides the synapses between dm3s) fig 4d plots only the average normalized outputs to the postsynaptic cell types in which we identified differences.article extended data fig 4 | see next page for caption.extended data fig 4 | marker gene expressions in tmy4 tmy8 tmy14 lc12 and lc17 neurons.tf stainings) these were verified with at least 10 different neurons per type (except extended data fig 4e).]
Summary: Correlation patterns between neuronal clusters show decreased similarity in gene expression profiles during synaptogenesis, indicating increased transcriptional diversity.

Text 536
10.1038/s41586-020-2879-3
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 10e). even though t4 and t5, dm3 and tm9 may represent extreme cases, this increased transcriptional diversity during synapse formation is indeed a general phenomenon: pearson correlations between the average gene expression profiles of clusters that are most similar']. Reference sentences:[]
Summary: Correlation between average gene expression profiles of similar clusters increases during synapse formation, indicating transcriptional diversity.

Text 537
10.1038/s41586-020-2941-1
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 4 | nkd2 as a therapeutic target. a, expression of nkd2 in mouse pdgfrα+pdgfrβ+ cells visualized on the umap embedding from fig 3j. b, percentage of col1a1+/− cells in mouse pdgfrα+pdgfrβ+ cells (fig 3j, stratified by pdgfrα and nkd2 expression). c, scaled gene expression of nkd2 correlating or anti-correlating genes in human pdgfrβ+ cells (fig 2). d, e, rna ish of pdgfra, pdgfrb and nkd2 in human kidneys (d) and quantification of triple-positive cells (e) (n = 36, patient data in supplementary table 2). n = 20 and 16 (for box plots in e). p values determined by two-tailed mann–whitney test. tukey box and whisker plot. scale bar, 10 μm. f, g, representative western blots of nkd2 overexpression (f) and knockout (g) in human pdgfrβ cells. ev, empty vector. for gel source data, see extended data fig 10e. h, gene set enrichment analysis (gsea) of ecm genes in nkd2-perturbed pdgfrβ− kidney cells. nes, normalized enrichment score;']. Reference sentences:[unsupervised clustering of 37380 pdgfrβ+ cells sorted from human kidneys (n = 4; egfr > 60 and n = 4; egfr < 60) (supplementary table 1) identified mesenchymal pop- ulations and some epithelial endothelial and immune cells which were annotated by correlation with the cd10− populations (fig 2a b extended data fig 4a–e).ecm gene expression again dominated in peri- cyte fibroblast and myofibroblast clusters (extended data fig 4f–i).some macrophage monocyte endothelial and injured epithelial popu- lations also expressed col1α1 and pdgfrβ but at much lower levels (fig 2a b extended data fig 4f–i).doublet-likelihood scores were low for endothelial and injured epithelial cells but slightly increased in macrophages (extended data fig 4j).we verified col1a1 mrna expression in these cells by in situ hybridization (ish) (extended data fig 4k–m).nkd2 is specifically expressed in mouse pdgfrα+pdgfrβ+ ter- minally differentiated myofibroblasts (fig 4a extended data fig 9i) and cells positive for both nkd2 and pdgfrα constituted more than 40% of all col1α1+ cells (fig 4b).in human pdgfrβ+ cells nkd2 marks high ecm myofibroblasts its expression correlates positively with postn and ecm and negatively with genes associated with pericytes and fibroblasts (fig 4c extended data fig 10a b).multiplex ish in 36 patients confirmed that a subpopulation of pdgfrα+pdgfrβ+ cells expresses nkd2 and expands in fibrosis (fig 4d e).lentiviral overexpression of nkd2 in our human pdgfrβ cell line induced expression of ecm molecules in response to tgfβ whereas knockout of nkd2 markedly reduced the expression of col1a1 fn1 and acta2 in the presence or absence of tgfβ (fig 4f g extended data fig 10h–j).rna-seq analysis from cells overexpressing nkd2 demonstrated upregulated ecm regulators and glycoproteins whereas nkd2-knockout cells exhibited loss of ecm regulators glycoproteins and collagens (fig 4h).this score is aggregated per cluster and reported for each integrated map (extended data fig 4i 8e) but not used to exclude cells.positive numbers indicate enrichment relative to what would be expected by chance negative numbers indicate deple- tion (see fig 4k).article extended data fig 4 | see next page for caption.extended data fig 4 | pdgfrβ+ cell enrichment.q the surgery type per cell (sham versus uuo) visualized on the same umap embedding from fig 4c (top) or with colours representing the cell types/ states (bottom).visualized on the umap embedding from fig 4c.]
Patterns of gene expression correlation and anti-correlation in single cells, particularly in relation to nkd2 and ecm genes.

Text 538
10.1038/s41586-020-2907-3
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 1e, coloured by normalized soma depth. inset, examples of it neurons at different depths, coloured by t-type. scatter plot used eight t-types with at least five cells and shows correlation between transcriptomic distances and cortical depth distances. cortical depth distance is euclidean distance between the average normalized soma depths. e, pvalb neurons from layer 5 mapped to the reference t-sne embedding from fig 1d, coloured by axonal width/height log-ratio. circle area corresponds to the width × height product. insets, example morphologies.']. Reference sentences:[]
Summary: Correlation between transcriptomic distances and cortical depth distances in single cells, focusing on Pvalb neurons from layer 5.

Text 539
10.1038/s41586-020-2907-3
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 4 | phenotypic variability within transcriptomic families. a, vip neurons mapped to the reference t-sne embedding from fig 1c, coloured by membrane time constant (τ). insets, example firing traces. b, sst neurons from layer 5 (excluding sst chodl t-type) mapped to the reference t-sne embedding from fig 1d, coloured by rebound value. c, correlation between transcriptomic distances and electrophysiological distances across all 200 pairs of t-types from the same family (for 50 t-types with at least 5 cells), pooled across all families. transcriptomic distance was computed using the reference 10x data as the correlation between average log-expression across most variable genes. electrophysiological distance is euclidean distance between the average']. Reference sentences:[to obtain quantitative characterizations of the morpho-electric phenotypes we extracted 29 electrophysiological (extended data fig 4 supplementary file 2) and about 50 morphological features for each cell.moreover we often found that morpho-electric phenotypes varied continuously from one t-type to another (fig 4).for example electrophysiological properties of the t-types within the vip subclass varied continuously across the transcriptomic landscape; the membrane time constant for instance had its largest values close to the sncg subclass and gradually decreased towards vip gpc3 (fig 4a).here we also found that morpho-electric properties varied continuously across the transcriptomic landscape with neighbouring t-types consistently showing similar morphologies and similar rebound values (fig 4b).pooling the pairs across all families we found that these two distance measures were correlated with r = 0.60 (fig 4c n = 200 pairs; extended data fig 7).the it subclass provides an example of a similar phenomenon in another data modality (fig 4d).however we found that it t-types did not form distinct groups for each cortical layer; instead the soma depth and rna expression varied continuously along a one-dimensional manifold (fig 4d) in agreement with parallel findings based on a spatial transcriptomics approach34.transcriptomic distances between t-types were strongly correlated with the average soma depth differences (r = 0.70; fig 4d).the shape of the axonal arbor showed continuous changes across the transcriptomic landscape (fig 4e): small shrub-like basket cells horizontally elongated basket cells and vertically elongated classical basket cells were located in different corners of the t-sne embedding with intermediate morphologies in between.by contrast vip mybpc1_2 was marked as having high electrophysiological variability and indeed had high variance in input resistance membrane time con- stant and rebound (extended data fig 4).for the 45 neurons with missing soma depth measurements we used the layer targeted during the recording for all layer-based analyses and visualizations (marker shapes in fig 1c–e 3a–c layer-restricted analysis in fig 4 extended data fig 8).the point at which the regression line crossed the x-axis gave the rheobase estimate (extended data fig 4).the action potential (ap) threshold ap amplitude ap width afterhyperpolarization (ahp) afterdepolarization (adp) the first ap latency and the upstroke-to-downstroke ratio (udr) were computed as illustrated in extended data fig 4 using the first ap fired by the neuron.the sag area refers to the absolute value of the integral of the membrane voltage minus the steady-state voltage during the sag time period (extended data fig 4).within-family analysis to study the relationship between transcriptomic and electrophyiological distances between pairs of t-types (fig 4c d extended data fig 6 7) we took all t-types with five or more cells assigned to them (for extended data fig 7a: with ten or more).the 1000 most variable genes across all neural types were used for fig 4c and extended data fig 7a b and the 500 most variable genes across the respective transcriptomic group (see above) were used for fig 4d and extended data fig 6i j and 7c–n.fig 4d used the soma depth distance computed as the absolute value of the difference between the average normalized soma depths.extended data fig 4 | extraction and distribution of electrophysiological features.i overlay of the l5 sst cells over the reference t-sne embedding coloured by rebound as in fig 4b.the same analysis as in fig 4c but showing within-family as well as between-family pairs of t-types.e exemplary morphologies of l5 cells from the pvalb reln type and t-sne overlay coloured by the axonal width/height log-ratio as in fig 4e.f exemplary morphologies of pvalb vipr2_2 chandelier neurons and t-sne overlay coloured by the axonal width/height log-ratio as in fig 4e.]
Patterns related to correlation between transcriptomic and electrophysiological distances across different cell types within the same family were shown in the figure.

Text 540
10.1038/s41586-020-2907-3
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 2 | sparse reduced-rank regression. a, b, a sparse reduced-rank regression (rrr) model32 to predict combined electrophysiological features from gene expression. transcriptomic data are linearly projected to a low-dimensional space that allows reconstruction of electrophysiological data; components 1 and 2 (a) and 1 and 3 (b) of rank-5 model are shown. n = 1,219. colour corresponds to t-type. the model selected 25 genes (left). each panel is a biplot, showing correlations of original features with both components; the circle corresponds to correlation 1. only features with average correlation above 0.4 are shown. labels were automatically positioned to reduce overlap. ai, adaptation index; ap, action potential; cv, coefficient of variation; isi, interspike interval; r_input, input resistance; v_rest, resting potential; udr, upstroke-to-downstroke ratio.']. Reference sentences:[detected genes per cell (extended data fig 2).we found that patch-seq expression profiles were most similar to the single-nucleus smart-seq2 data (extended data fig 2g h).at the same time there was good agreement between t-type assignments based on smart-seq2 and those based on 10x reference data (extended data fig 2i) so consensus lamp5 pax6 lamp5 egln3_1 lamp5 egln3_2 lamp5 egln3_3 lamp5 pdlim5_1 lamp5 pdlim5_2 lamp5 slc35d3 lamp5 lhx6 sncg col14a1 sncg slc17a8 sncg calb1_1 sncg calb1_2 sncg npy2r vip sncg vip serpinf1_1 vip serpinf1_2 vip serpinf1_3 vip htr1f vip gpc3 vip c1ql1 vip mybpc1_1 vip mybpc1_2 vip mybpc1_3 vip chat_1 vip chat_2 vip igfbp6_1 vip igfbp6_2 sst chodl sst penk sst myh8_1 sst myh8_2 sst myh8_3 sst htr1a sst etv1 sst pvalb etv1 sst crhr2_1 sst crhr2_2 sst hpse sst calb2 sst pvalb calb2 sst pappa sst c1ql3_1 sst c1ql3_2 sst tac2 sst th_1 sst th_2 sst th_3 pvalb gabrg1 pvalb egfem1 pvalb gpr149 pvalb kank4 pvalb calb1_1 pvalb calb1_2 pvalb reln pvalb il1rapl2 pvalb vipr2_1 pvalb vipr2_2 l2/3 it_1 l2/3 it_2 l2/3 it_3 l4/5 it_1 l4/5 it_2 l5 it_1 l5 it_2 l5 it_3 l5 it_4 l6 it_1 l6 it_2 l6 it car3 l5 et_1 l5 et_2 l5 et_3 l5 et_4 l5/6 np_1 l5/6 np_2 l5/6 np_3 l5/6 np ct l6 ct gpr139 l6 ct cpa6 l6 ct grp l6 ct pou3f2 l6 ct kit_1 l6 ct kit_2 l6b col6a1 l6b shisa6_1 l6b shisa6_2 l6b ror1 l6b kcnip1 0 25 50 75 100 number of cells cge-derived interneurons mge-derived interneurons excitatory neurons 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 normalized soma depth l1 l2/3 l5 l6 pax6 egln3_1 egln3_2 egln3_3 pdlim5_1 pdlim5_2 slc35d3 lhx6 col14a1 slc17a8 calb1_1 calb1_2 npy2r sncg s1 s2 s3 htr1f gpc3 c1ql1 mybpc1_1 mybpc1_2 m3 chat_1 chat_2 igfbp6_1 igfbp6_2 vip sncg lamp5 l1 l2/3 l5 l6 chodl penk myh8_1 myh8_2 myh8_3 htr1a etv1 pvalb etv1 crhr2_1 crhr2_2 hpse calb2 pvalb calb2 c1ql3_1 c1ql3_2 tac2 th_1 th_3 gabrg1 egfem1 gpr149 kank4 calb1_1 calb1_2 reln il1rapl2 vipr2_2 pvalb sst l2/3 it_1 l2/3 it_2 l2/3 it_3 l4/5 it_1 l4/5 it_2 l5 it_1 l5 it_2 l5 it_3 l5 it_4 l6 it_1 l6 it_2 car3 np_1 np_2 np_3 np ct g cpa6 grp pou3f2 col6a1 s1 s2 ror1 kcnip1 et np ct it a b c d e f fig 1 | transcriptomic coverage.cells that showed poor mapping (owing to a low read count or excessive rna contamination) were excluded (extended data fig 2) leaving 1227 neurons for further analysis (817 inhibitory 410 excitatory; 369 and 269 with morphological reconstructions respectively).to visualize the structure of the latent space we projected gene expression and electrophysiological properties onto the latent dimensions (fig 2).these first three components clearly separated five major groups of neurons: the pvalb sst vip and lamp5 interneuron subclasses and the excitatory neuron class (fig 2).these groups had distinct electrophysiological properties: for example as expected pvalb neurons were characterized by high firing rates while sst neurons had high values of the hyperpolarization sag and rebound (fig 2 right).we used only dendritic features for the excitatory cells but both axonal and dendritic features for the arpp21 bcan bdnf cacna1e cacna2d1 cacna2d3 coro6 erbb4 gabrd gad1 galnt14 htr3a kcnip2 lamp5 mybpc1 nxph1 pde1a ptk2b pvalb slc6a1 sst synpr tac1 tafa1 vip ap amp ap amp ai ap width ahp isi ai isi cv r_input max ap num tau rebound v_rest rheobase sag udr arpp21 bcan bdnf cacna1e cacna2d1 cacna2d3 coro6 erbb4 gad1 htr3a kcnip2 lamp5 mybpc1 nxph1 pde1a ptk2b pvalb slc6a1 sst tac1 tafa1 vip ap amp ap amp ai ap width ahp isi ai isi cv max ap num tau rebound sag udr transcriptomic space electrophysiological space component 1 component 1 component 2 component 3 a b fig 2 | sparse reduced-rank regression.animals experiments on adult male and female mice (n = 266; median age 75 days interquartile range 64–100 full range 35–245 days extended data fig 2a) were performed on wild-type c57bl/6 (n = 27) viaat-cre/ ai9 (vesicular inhibitory amino acid transporter encoded by the slc32a1 gene n = 24) sst-cre/ai9 (somatostatin n = 75) vip-cre/ai9 (vasoactive intestinal polypeptide n = 46) pvalb-cre/ai9 (parvalbumin n = 76) npy-cre/ai9 (neuropeptide y n = 2) vipr2-cre/ai9 (vasoactive intestinal peptide receptor 2 n = 7) scl17a8-cre/ai9 (vglut3 vesicular glutamate transporter 3 n = 6) gnb4-cre/ai9 (n = 1) and slc17a8-icre/ ai9 (n = 2) mice.all measurements were normalized by the respective slice thickness and the averages over all n = 15 slices were used as the normalized layer boundaries (extended data fig 2b).we took their ratio as the normalized soma depth and assigned each neuron to a layer (l1 l2/3 l5 or l6) based on the nissl-determined layer boundaries (extended data fig 2b).cells meeting any of the following exclusion criteria were declared low quality and did not get a t-type assignment (extended data fig 2e): cells with the highest correlation below 0.4 (78 cells); cells that would be assigned to non-neural t-types presumably owing to rna contamination51 (14 cells; see also extended data fig 2j–n); cells with the highest correlation less than 0.02 above the maximal correlation in one of the other two large transcriptomic groups (5 cells).the confidences obtained with seven reference data sets agreed well with each other (extended data fig 2i) and were averaged to obtain the consensus confidence.the most likely cause of this was rna contamination from excitatory cells which are much more abundant than inhibitory cells in the mouse cortex (extended data fig 2).for fig 2 we used a model with rank r = 5 zero ridge penalty (α = 1) and lasso penalty tuned to yield a selection of 25 genes (λ = 0.5).the plots shown in fig 2a b are called bibiplots because they combine two biplots: the left biplot shows a mapping of gene expression levels onto the two latent dimensions; the right biplot shows the same mapping of electrophysiological features.the circle shows the maximal possible correlation; only lines longer than 0.4 times the circle radius are shown in fig 2.article extended data fig 2 | see next page for caption.extended data fig 2 | quality control.vertical dashed lines at 25 genes corresponds to the choice made for fig 2.a full analogue of fig 2 but using only 328 ion channel genes (see methods) of which 307 were detected in our data set in at least 10 cells.an analogue of fig 2 but using morphological instead of electrophysiological features.]
Patterns related to correlation between gene expression and electrophysiological features in different cell types were shown in a low-dimensional space.

Text 541
10.1126/science.aba7721
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 2. identification of cell subtypes. (a) pipeline for cell subtype identification. briefly, on a tissue-by-tissue basis, we subjected each main cell type with >1000 cells to batch correction (102), umap visualization, and louvain clustering. clusters with similar transcriptomes were merged by an automated procedure. briefly, we applied an intradataset cross-validation approach (101) to evaluate their specificity and iteratively merged similar clusters. we then compared putative human cell subtypes identified in our data (rows) against annotated mouse cell types from the corresponding tissues (16) (columns) by cell type correlation analysis. colors correspond to beta values, normalized by']. Reference sentences:[as ex- pected annotated kidney cell types have much higher specificity scores (median 0.99) than control cell types in which cell labels are per- muted before cross-validation (median 0.17) [fig 2a (leftmost panel only) fig 2b (left panel only) fig s4a and table s3].once again annotated main cell types exhibited much higher specificity scores than permuted cell types (fig 2c and fig s4b; median 0.99 versus 0.10; p < 2.2 × 10−16 two- sided wilcoxon rank sum test).for each main cell type in each tissue we first applied batch correction (102) followed by dimensionality reduction and louvain clustering (fig 2a).unsurprisingly given the procedure used for merging clusters these subtypes have higher specificity scores than permuted controls (median 0.77 versus 0.13; p < 2.2 × 10−16 two-sided wilcoxon rank sum test; fig 2c).for example diverse epithelial subtypes in the human kidney matched 1:1 with annotated mca cell types (fig 2a) and diverse neuronal subtypes in the human cerebrum matched 1:1 with annotated mbca cell types (fig s9).not- ably although there were many sets of human subtypes that matched a single mca or mbca cell type (e.g. hepatoblasts in fig s5 and oli- godendrocytes in fig s9) these likely reflect bonafide heterogeneity as evidenced by their specificity scores (fig 2c).]
Patterns of cell subtype identification based on correlation with annotated cell types, showing higher specificity scores for matched subtypes.

Text 542
10.1016/j.cell.2020.10.026
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 2. spatial multi-omics mapping of whole mouse embryos (a) pan-mrna and pan-protein-panel spatial expression maps (pixel size, 50 mm) reconstructed from dbit-seq, alongside the h&e image from an adjacent tissue section. whole transcriptome pan-mrna map correlated with anatomic tissue morphology and density. (b) comparison to ‘‘pseudo bulk’’ rna-seq data. four embryo samples (e10) analyzed by dbit-seq correctly situated in the umap in relation to those analyzed by single-cell rna-seq (cao et al., 2019) in terms of the developmental stage. (c) unsupervised clustering analysis and spatial pattern. left: umap showing the clusters of tissue pixel transcriptomes. middle: spatial distribution of the clusters. right: overlay of spatial cluster map and tissue image(h&e). because the h&e staining was conducted on an adjacent tissue section, minor differences were anticipated. (d) gene ontology (go) analysis of all 11 clusters. selected go terms are highlighted. (e) anatomic annotation of major tissue regions based on the h&e image. (f) correlation between mrnas and proteins in each of the anatomically annotated tissue regions. the average expression levels of individual mrnas and cognate proteins are compared. see also figure s3.']. Reference sentences:[the tissue histology image from an adjacent section was stained for h&e (figure 2a left).the spatial map of umi counts (figure 2a middle and right) showed co-detection of 12314 umis for mrnas and =3038 umis for 22 proteins per pixel.to benchmark dbit-seq data we aggregated the mrna expression profiles of all pixels for each e10 embryo sample to generate ‘‘pseudo-bulk’’ data which were compared to the ‘‘pseudo-bulk’’ data generated from scrna-seq of e9.5–e13.5 mouse embryos (cao et al. 2019) using unsupervised clustering (figure 2b).using the literature database and the clas- sical kaufman’s atlas of mouse development (baldock and ar- mit 2018) a manual anatomical annotation was performed to reveal 13 major tissue types (figure 2e).a chart was generated to show the expression of 8 mrna/protein pairs in 13 anatomically annotated tissue regions (figure 2f).as compared to the 50 mm experiment (figure 2) pan-mrna and pan-protein umi count maps (figure 3c) showed finer structures that corre- lated with tissue morphology (figure 3b).the validation experiments in figure 2 indicate the diffusion distance is =1 mm and the theoretical pixel size can be as small as =2 mm.the pan-mrna and pan-protein heatmap plots in figure 2a were generated using raw umi counts without normalization.spatial expression of mrnas and proteins in whole mouse embryo (e10) related to figure 2 (a) hox gene patterns detected by dbit-seq.(b) spatial expression of 15 protein/mrna pairs as shown in figure 2.(c) (upper) pearson correlation between mrnas and proteins averaged within each of the 13 different tissue regions in figure 2f.(c) features identified in the whole mouse embryo (e10) tissue sample (figure 2).]
Patterns of correlation between mRNA and protein expressions in different anatomically annotated tissue regions in single-cell transcriptomics data.

Text 543
10.1016/j.cell.2020.10.026
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure s6. comparison of transcriptional profiles between dbit-seq and the encode rna-seq data in heart, liver, and neural tube of a e11 mouse embryo sample, related to figure 6 pearson correlation analysis of gene expression profiles between the encode bulk rna-seq data and pseudo-bulk dbit-seq data across three major organs in a e11 mouse embryo tissue sample. three featured regions (heart, liver, and neural tube) of mouse embryo (e11 and e11.5) were manually selected and pseudobulk expression was generated and compared to the encode bulk rna-seq datasets. average correlation coefficients are 0.74 ± 0.02 for heart, 0.79 ± 0.01 for liver and 0.79 ± 0.01 for neural tube.']. Reference sentences:[]
Summary: Correlation of gene expression profiles between single-cell and bulk RNA-seq data in different organs of a mouse embryo at E11.

Text 544
10.1016/j.cell.2020.10.026
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure s3. spatial expression of mrnas and proteins in whole mouse embryo (e10), related to figure 2 (a) hox gene patterns detected by dbit-seq. a group of homeobox (hox) genes specify regions of the body plan along the head-tail axis of a mouse embryo during the development. (b) spatial expression of 15 protein/mrna pairs as shown in figure 2. (c) (upper) pearson correlation between mrnas and proteins averaged within each of the 13 different tissue regions in figure 2f. (lower) pearson correlation conducted pixel by pixel between mrna and proteins over the entire mapped tissue area in (b). (d) pan-endothelial cell antigen (peca), which marks the formation of embryonic vasculature, is expressed extensively at this stage (e10), consistent with the peca protein and mrna expression revealed by dbit-seq. epcam (blue), an epithelial cell marker, appears in several highly localized regions, which was also detected by dbit-seq (both mrna and protein) in the same regions. p2ry12 (red) is a marker for microglia in cns, which depicts the spatial distribution of the nerve system. scale bar = 500 mm.']. Reference sentences:[]
Summary: Correlation between mRNA and protein expressions in different tissue regions and spatial distribution of specific markers in a mouse embryo at e10.

Text 545
10.1038/s41586-020-2922-4
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 4 | evolutionary divergence of lung cell types and expression patterns. a, mouse (top) lung molecular cell types (profiled and identified as for human, see methods) aligned with homologous human types (bottom, figs. 1a, 2a) by expression of classical markers in supplementary table 6. thin lines, evolutionary expansions; dashed lines, potential expansions of functionally-related types. red text, newly identified populations (light red, identified in only one subject); blue, cell states more abundant in human; grey, extant mouse cell types not captured in our data or found in only one patient in human. asterisk denotes missing cell types. alvmp, alveolar macrophages; alvmp-p, proliferating alveolar macrophages. b, scatter plot comparing average expression levels (dots) in at2 cells of each expressed human gene and mouse orthologue (ss2 datasets; n = 3,404 human and 318 mouse at2 cells). r denotes pearson correlation coefficient. red dots denote divergent genes (selected ones indicated) expressed 20-fold higher in either species. p < 0.05, ‘mast’ differential gene expression test. scale, ln(cpm + 1). c, alveolar sections from mouse (top, mm) and human (bottom, hs) immunostained for hopx (red)']. Reference sentences:[pericyte and lipofibroblast marker staining in extended data fig 4h i.two clusters expressed classical fibroblast markers (bsg and col1a2) (fig 1e) but one (spint2+fgfr4+gpc3+) localized to alveoli (‘alveolar fibroblasts’) and the other (sfrp2+pi16+serpinf1+) to vas- cular adventitia and nearby airways (‘adventitial fibroblasts’) (fig 1f extended data fig 4a–d).both expressed genes involved in canonical fibroblast functions (matrix biosynthesis adhesion and signalling regulators) but the specific genes often differed (extended data fig 4e).one cluster (wif1+fgf18+aspn+) is classical myofibroblasts and localized to alveolar ducts (extended data fig 4f).this included three novel lung dendritic populations: igsf21+ and rare ereg+ dendritic cells express asthma genes (ccl2 ccl13 and igsf21) and developmental signals (ereg vegfa areg) respectively and both localize to proximal vessels; trem2+ dendritic cells localize to vessels and alveoli and express lipid machinery (apoc1 apoe and cyp27a1) (fig 2b extended data fig 4k–n).however for other types cells from lung formed a separate cluster (extended data fig 4o).homologous cell types were assigned by conserved expression of cell-type markers (fig 4a).corresponding cell types in human and mouse diverged in expression (a greater than 20-fold change p < 0.05) of hundreds of genes such as serpina1 pgc wif1 and lyz in at2 cells (fig 4b).type 0 (‘conserved’) genes are expressed in the same cell types in mouse and human (fig 4e extended data fig 12a).type 1 (‘expression gain/loss’) genes show simple gain (or loss) of expression between species which involved a single cell type (type 1a pgc) (fig 4e) several types (type 1b rnase1) (extended data fig 12b) or entire lung (type 1c trim38) (extended data fig 12b).for example hopx the canonical at1 transcription factor in mouse is expressed in both at1 and at2 cells in human (fig 4c e) which indicates the existence of other at1 transcription factors such as myrf which is at1-selective in both species (extended data fig 12c).two medically important examples are copd/emphysema genes serpina1 and hhip both selectively expressed in at2 cells in human but alveolar stromal cells in mice (fig 4d e extended data fig 12e); other hedgehog pathway com- ponents were mostly conserved (extended data fig 12f).extended data fig 4 | see next page for caption.article extended data fig 4 | markers and lung localization of stromal and dendritic subtypes.]
Summary: Divergence in gene expression patterns between human and mouse lung cell types, with hundreds of genes showing significant correlation changes.

Text 546
10.1038/s41467-020-19737-2
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 1 experimental setup and overview of human samples and datasets used. a workﬂow for the generation of the discovery dataset. brain myeloid cells were isolated from 17 donors of both sexes (for a detailed isolation protocol see methods section, for details on the donors see supplementary data 1). autopsy samples originated from deceased aged individuals with various pathologies, while surgical biopsy samples were from young and middle-aged individuals undergoing surgery for intractable epilepsy. the single-cell suspension preparation of sorted cells was loaded onto one lane of the chromium system (10x genomics) and the resulting library was sequenced on the hiseq4000 platform (illumina). after quality control, the dataset consisted of 16,242 cells which were then subjected to unsupervised hierarchical clustering. b in situ confirmation of subset abundance and ad trait associations. we performed immunohistochemistry using markers enriched in microglial subsets in order to investigate the abundance of the specific clusters in situ and their associations to clinical and pathological traits of ad. following image acquisition with a ﬂuorescence microscope, automated image analysis was done using cellprofiler. c independent replication of the basic population structure of microglia. we used a recently published human microglia single-cell rna sequencing dataset to confirm the basic population structure of aged human microglia25. the two datasets were aligned using cca. d independent replication of the ad trait associations. a recently published single nucleus rna sequencing dataset9 was used to confirm the ad trait associations found in our dataset. the two datasets were aligned using cca. dlpfc dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, tnc temporal neocortex, mci mild cognitive impairment, ad alzheimer’s disease, tle temporal lobe epilepsy, cntrl non-neurological control, tsne t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding, radc rush alzheimer’s disease center, map rush memory and aging project, bwh brigham and women’s hospital, cumc adrc columbia university medical center alzheimer’s disease research center, ffpe formalin fixed paraffin embedded, cca canonical correlation analysis.']. Reference sentences:[figure 1 details the workﬂow and the design of this study which included a discovery dataset of single-cell rna sequencing (scrna-seq) from microglia (fig 1a) based on which we define the basic population structure of microglia in situ confirmation of our findings (fig 1b) and independent replication of our observation in two independent datasets (fig 1c d).the extracted live immune cells from these autopsy and surgery samples primarily consist of myeloid cells (supplemen- tary fig 1a) and we observed the presence of rare non-myeloid immune cells in some of the samples (supplementary fig 1b).these non-myeloid cells were collected to serve as a positive control for our experimental and computational pipeline’s ability to resolve different cell types (supplementary fig 1; see supplementary data 1 for sorting gate used with each sample).importantly neither the modified gating strategy to include the peripheral immune cells nor the different cell sorters affected the basic population structure of microglia (supplemen- tary fig 1c–g).(fig 8a b supplementary fig 10 and supplementary data 10).on the other hand peripheral myeloid cluster 10 also shows a mixed series of association with amyloid pathology as well as inﬂammatory and proliferative diseases (supplementary fig 11a).we also see that many individual gwas-identified risk genes for ad pd ms and als (supplementary fig 12a through d respectively) are expressed in most of the clusters and are not enriched in any particular microglial subset; however microglial cells belonging to cluster 4 and 7 do have a higher expression of some of the ad susceptibility genes such as apoe and trem2 respectively (supplementary fig 12a).further cluster 4 has a higher expression of ms susceptibility genes (such as ifitm3; supplementary fig 12c).interestingly the tspo gene the target for all current microglial markers used in positron emission tomography (pet) studies is at the rna level expressed in all clusters at a comparable level (supplementary fig 12e) and may therefore be a good proxy for total microglial count.on the other hand the monocyte cluster genes appear to be upregulated in relation to an increasing amyloid pathology burden (supplementary fig 11d).gene-set enrichment analysis (supplementary fig 12 and supplementary data 12) shows that m5 is widely expressed across microglial subtypes and does not align with any single microglial subset.adjusting for age and gender we find that subjects with ad (1) have a significant reduction in the frequency of iba1+ cd74high microglial cells in the frontal cortex (p = 0.0089; fig 8d) but (2) have no change in the number of total iba1 + cells (p = 0.30; supplementary fig 14a).as shown in supplementary fig 15d we did not find any association between the topological distribution of cluster 7 and amyloid plaques.the clusters are also found in single nucleus data (supplementary fig 14) consistent with the fact that our purification protocol does not appear to lose a specific microglial subtype.in particular antigen-presenting cluster 7 stands out amongst the other clusters since it emerges as enriched for ad genes that are diminished in expression at the cortical tissue level in both pathologically defined ad and ad dementia (fig 8c and sup- plementary fig 14b c).results for two different clusters are shown (cluster 4 and cluster 7); results for the other microglial clusters are included in supplementary fig 10.there is no difference in the frequency of iba1+ cells (supplementary fig 14a).the per individual proportions of each cluster is shown in supplementary fig 14b.subsequently the cell sus- pension was washed twice with staining buffer filtered through a 70 um filter and the cd11b+/cd45+/7aad- cells or cd45+/7aad- cells (fig 1a supplementary fig 1 and supplementary data 1) were sorted on a bd facs aria ii or inﬂux cell sorter.using these cluster-specific gene lists we performed disease ontology analyses using the dose r package26 with standard parameters and benjamini–hochberg procedure (fig 8a b and supplementary fig 10 and 11a–c).we appended the single nuclei identified as microglia in that study to our clusters using canonical correlation analysis (cca)37 followed by mapping nuclei to our single- cell microglia clusters in cca space using a naïve bayes classifier (supplementary fig 14b).as expected the microglial clusters showed enrichment for a subset of modules known to be enriched for microglial signatures (supple- mentary fig 13 and supplementary data 12) whereas the non-microglial clusters showed much weaker associations.similar approach was used for assessing topological dis- tribution of cluster 7 microglia (supplementary fig 15) as it relates to amyloid plaques.]
Patterns related to correlation between gene expressions and disease traits in microglial cells were analyzed using single-cell transcriptomics.

Text 547
10.1038/s41467-020-20019-0
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 9b). however, we also observed a significant correlation between m1 and m2 signatures in macrophages (supplementary fig 9c), which indicated a complicated macrophage polarization process in escc, which was consistent with other researchs12,18.']. Reference sentences:[]
Summary: Correlation between different signatures in macrophages indicates a complex polarization process in single-cell analysis.

Text 548
10.1038/s42003-020-01476-1
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 6 intra-tumoral meta-programs underlying ned. a heatmap showing scores of 12861 epithelial cells (column, from 6 crpc patients) for each of 60 programs (rows) derived from nmf analysis of individual samples. cells and programs are hierarchically clustered, and 3 ne-related meta-programs (p1, p2, and p4) and a cell cycle-related meta-program (p3) are highlighted. b enrichment scores of prostate lineages: basal, luminal, ne marker genes and ar, stemness, emt, and cell cycle pathway genes in cells ordered as in (a), with the color-coding for the corresponding crpc sample. c pearson correlation between the expression of genes of p1, p2, and p4 and the ne score, as measured by the average expression of 14 known ne markers. three previously published bulk rna-seq datasets were used in this analysis, as described in the “methods” section. highlighted in red are some known ned genes (source data are provided as supplementary data 1). d heatmap depicting strong expression of 121 genes (pearson r ≥ 0.3, as measured by pearson correlation analysis shown in (c) in ar−ne+ group of morrissey dataset. total samples are divided into five groups as previously suggested in ref. 40.']. Reference sentences:[for this purpose we applied non-negative matrix factorization (nmf) to define underlying transcriptional programs specific to the epithelial cells from each tumor4647 (fig 6a and supplementary data 6).to relate these meta- programs to cell phenotypes we scored these ordered cells according to basal luminal ne emt ar and cell cycle marker genes (fig 6b).this analysis identified 121 genes highly correlated with the ne score (pearson r ≥ 0.3; fig 6c and supplementary data 7).consis- tently we found that by plotting their expression in the five groups of samples that was defined by the expression patterns of ne and ar activity genes30 most genes displayed evidently higher expression in the ar−ne+ group than in ne− groups (fig 6d).by performing nmf analysis we further identified three gene meta-programs consisting of many genes highly correlated with ned (fig 6a).the bulk datasets analysis has validated the robustness of this result showing that most genes are evidently expressed in patients with ned (fig 6d).]
Patterns related to correlation between gene expression and neuroendocrine (NE) markers in single cells were identified using non-negative matrix factorization (NMF) analysis.

Text 549
10.1038/s42003-020-01476-1
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 2 ne cells present an epithelial phenotype. a pairwise correlations between the expression profiles of 12,861 epithelial cells (rows, column) from 6 crpc samples (color bar). correlations were calculated across 63 lineage-specific genes (supplementary table 2). b enrichment scores for gene lists including basal, luminal, ne, ar, stemness, and emt pathway associated genes. cells were ordered as in (a). green indicates a low score and purple indicates a high score. c average inferred cnv signals of corresponding cells in (a). black indicates the high cnv signal (supplementary fig 3). d umap visualization of all 12,861 epithelial cells for the 6 patients with cells colored by the gradient of ne score (top) and average cnv signal (bottom). the minimum score is indicated by light gray and the maximum score is indicated by blue (top) or black (bottom). e umap visualization of all 12,861 epithelial cells from 6 patients with color-coded for the sample origin which kept concordant with (a).']. Reference sentences:[after exclusion of red blood cells as well as cells not passing quality controls we obtained a total of 21292 high-quality cells at ~2884 genes detected on average per cell (supplementary fig 2a and supplementary table 1).using an unsupervised graph-based clustering strategy we manually classified different cell clusters into eight major cell types with canonical markers curated from the literature including epithelial cells immune cells (t cells b cells myeloid cells and mast cells) stromal cells (fibroblasts and myofibroblasts) and endothelial cells (supplementary fig 2a b and supplementary data 2).notably we found that nehigh cell popula- tion detected in these three patients all belong to the epithelial cells instead of the non-epithelial cell compartments (fig 1c and supplementary fig 2c d) supporting an epithelial origin of ned.most importantly by analyzing cellular pheno- types/states we found that all ne cells prominently exhibited a luminal phenotype rather than basal phenotype (fig 2a b).inferred cnv analysis supported a malignant identity of ne cells as evidenced by remarkable cnvs (fig 2c d and supplementary fig 3a).in addition we noticed that the epithelial cells of patient #3 had very few cnvs (fig 2c and supplementary fig 3a) which was consistent with its histologically intraepithelial neoplasia characteristic (fig 1b).in addition to correlation analysis we also visualized cell–cell similarity by umap dimension reduction analysis of the 12861 epithelial cells (fig 2e and supplementary fig 3b).using the same approach we defined scores to estimate the activities of prostate cell lineages/pathway corresponding to basal luminal ne ar pathway emt state and cell stemness from previous literatures42229–3364666869 (fig 2b 6b).]
Summary: Patterns of correlation between gene expressions in epithelial cells, with enrichment scores for different cell types and pathways, inferred CNV signals, and cell-cell similarity visualized in UMAP plots.

Text 550
10.1016/j.cell.2020.11.028
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 4. ln-innervating sensory neurons are primarily peptidergic nociceptors (a) uniform manifold approximation and projection (umap) of the sharma et al. (2020) atlas, colored by previously defined cell types. (b) umap as in (a), with ln-innervating (yellow squares) and skin-innervating (blue squares) neurons projected. (c) predicted cell types for ln-innervating neurons (yellow) or skin-innervating neurons (blue). (d) spearman correlation between ln- or skin-innervating neurons and subsets from the sharma et al. (2020) atlas. hierarchical clustering divides ln- and skininnervating neurons into 4 subtypes: neuron type 1 (cgrp-like, black); neuron type 2 (cgrp-q, mrgprd+ polymodal nociceptor-, sst+ pruriceptor-like, tan); neuron type 3 (mixed cgrp-like, ltmr-like, turquoise); and neuron type 4 (mixed cgrp-x, -h, ltmr, proprioceptor-like, dark blue). (e) distribution of neuron types 1–4 by innervation target. (f) de genes (holm-adjusted p < 0.01). see also figure s4 and tables s1 and s2.']. Reference sentences:[(2020) (figure 4c).each neuron type was represented albeit in different proportions in ln-innervating and skin-innervating sensory neurons demon- strating intrinsic heterogeneity in sensory neurons innervating the same target as well as innervation target-dependent differ- ences in subtype composition (p < 0.001 by pearson’s chi-square test; figure 4e).using differential gene expression analysis we discovered unique gene modules that cleanly define each neuron type (figure 4f; table s1).accordingly the number of co-expressed ligand-receptor cognates between a ln-innervating neuron and any given ln cell type was used to estimate the ‘‘interaction potential’’ for that ln cell type (figures 6d 6e and s6a; star a b c d f e figure 4.results from label propagation are pre- sented in figure 4c.the results from this analysis are presented in figure 4d for comparison to the sharma atlas and figure s4c for compar- ison to the usoskin furlan atlas.we confirmed these clusters were largely stable and in agreement with the partitions created in comparison with the sharma atlas (figure 4d).scde was run as described above with default input parameters genes with a holm-corrected p value < 0.01 were considered significant and presented in figure 4f and table s1.]
Patterns of correlation between different neuron types innervating the same target, with distinct gene modules defining each type.

Text 551
10.1038/s43018-020-00154-9
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 2 | gscs converge on a single transcriptional gradient between developmental and injury response states. a, pca of 65,655 cells from 28 gsc cultures derived from 24 patients (middle). cells colored by expression of developmental (pc1-low) and injury response (pc1-high) programs (left and right, respectively). auc, area under the curve. b, relative expression of top 100 and bottom 100 weighted genes for pc1, in a subset of 14,000 individual gsc cells (500 cells per sample, randomly selected). select enriched genes highlighted. gsc cultures ordered by increasing median injury response program score as defined in fig 2d. c, relative program score for individual cells (500 cells per sample; same cells as in fig 2b) for top-correlated cell-type signatures. gsc cultures ordered as in fig 2d. d, relative signature scores of individual cells (n=65,655 cells from 28 gsc cultures) evaluated for developmental (red) and injury response (black) gene signatures derived from bulk rna-seq analysis (related to extended data fig 6d,e). e, single cell profiles from representative gsc cultures (n=4) show that individual gscs fall along a continuous axis between developmental and injury response states. cells are colored by relative expression of developmental (red) and injury response (black) expression programs. gsc cultures with intermediate scores either contain subpopulations of both subtypes or middling scores for both states.']. Reference sentences:[a subset of 14 clusters had increased similarity (mean jaccard index = 0.38 versus 0.066 for all other clusters) and shared upregulation of 358 core genes involved in cell cycling programs (extended data fig 2a–d).gscs with a larger fraction of actively cycling cells displayed increased aggressiveness and reduced survival upon implantation in an ortho- topic xenograft model (extended data fig 2c).remaining intra-gsc clusters (72 of 86) had limited marker similarity (mean jaccard index = 0.066) suggesting a large portion of subpopulations within gscs are specific to individual patients (extended data fig 2a).for example g549_l consisted of two transcrip- tional states; one cluster (c1) characterized by upregulation of edn1 and adm both hif-1 target genes involved in angiogenic signaling23 while the second cluster (c2) overexpressed ascl1 a transcription factor critical for neuronal differentiation that sup- presses tumorigenicity in gscs24 (extended data fig 2ef).gsc cultures ordered by increasing median injury response program score as defined in fig 2d.c relative program score for individual cells (500 cells per sample; same cells as in fig 2b) for top-correlated cell-type signatures.(fig 2a).cells with high pc1 loadings were associated with elevated expression of mesenchymal-related genes and enrichment of path- ways implicated in inflammation and immune cell activation as well as nuclear factor (nf)-κb and stat signaling (false discov- ery rate (fdr) < 0.01; fig 2b and extended data fig 5bc).when compared to cell types found in developing fetal brain3940 mature adult brain41–45 and malignant cell states in gbms25 these inflamed gscs best resembled both the cancer genome atlas (tcga) mesenchymal subtype and the mesenchymal-like cell state2 in gbms as well as neuroprotective a2 reactive astrocytes (fig 2c extended data fig 5b and supplementary table 6).similarly these developmental-like gscs mirrored transcriptional profiles of multiple malignant gbm cell types such as the classical and proneural subtypes reported by tcga5 and recently reported neural precursor (npc) astrocyte (ac) and opc-like cell states2 (fig 2c and extended data fig 5b).we conclude that gscs exist between two major transcriptional programs: one reminiscent of neural development with differentia- tion capacity which we term ‘developmental’ (low pc1 loadings) and the other with inflammatory and wound response signaling resembling reactive astrocytes which we name ‘injury response’ (high pc1 loadings) (fig 2a).(fig 2de and extended data fig 7c).rows ordered by position on the transcriptional gradient (related to fig 2d).samples are ordered by position on the transcriptional gradient (related to fig 2d) and annotated with gsva gene signature scores from matched bulk rna-seq.individual cnv scores were averaged across intra-gsc clusters to visualize transcriptional clusters with unique cnv profiles in fig 2b.b enriched pathways from 358 genes common to all 14 clusters defined in extended data fig 2a.b correlation of cell type gene signature scores from pc1 cell embeddings (n = 65655 cells from 28 gsc cultures; outlier g800_l removed as in fig 2a).(n = 65655 cells from 28 gsc cultures; outlier g800_l removed as in fig 2a).d gene set enrichment analysis (gsea) on pc1 loadings (gene associations with pc1) visualized using enrichmentmap (n = 65655 cells from 28 gsc cultures; outlier g800_l removed as in fig 2a).cells coloured by pc1 cell embeddings (left; related to fig 2a) scaled developmental transcriptional program score (middle) and scaled injury response transcriptional program score (right).samples ordered as presented in fig 2d.samples ordered as presented in fig 2d.]
Patterns related to correlation between developmental and injury response states in single cells are shown in the figure.

Text 552
10.1016/j.cell.2020.12.016
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 2. spatio-temporal analysis of intestinal development with st and scrna-seq integration (a) umap plot of spot transcriptome clusters from each slide shown on left; clusters are visualized on tissue covered slide areas (left center). integration with scrna-seq cell type annotations are shown on the right, with tissue morphology of the region shown right center for 12 pcw ti (i), 12 pcw colon (ii), 19 pcw colon (iii) and adult colon (iv) slides. all h&e images are from selected areas of st slides from the following tissue sections: a6 (i), a8 (ii), a4 (iii) and a1 (iv). full images are available in (fawkner-corbett et al., 2020). (b) validation of st method by comparison of adult intestinal tissue spots with histological landmarks and known related single genes – crypt top colonocyte transcriptomic signature near crypt tops (top left, left-center) and myofibroblast signature near muscularis mucosa (top right, right-center); expression of known immune cell marker ptprc/cd45 in spots covering submucosal lymphoid follicle (bottom left, left-center) and expression of ret at myenteric plexus (bottom right, right-center). all h&e images are from selected areas of st tissue section from section a1, h&e reference image is repeated for clarity (top). full image is available in (fawkner-corbett et al., 2020). (c) (i) pairwise cell type prediction signal correlation heatmap in adult st spots. non-significant correlations (<0.05 adjusted p value) are shown in white; color bar indicates pearson’s r value. red boxes highlight selected biologically relevant correlation groups. (ii) heatmap showing distance-smoothed expression of significant distance-varying genes detected in adult st slide. vertical break indicates muscularis mucosa/distance score of zero and spots in the submucosa are assigned a negative distance score while spots in the mucosa are assigned a positive distance score. two broad gene clusters are assigned by cutting hierarchical clustering tree, dividing the gene groups into mucosa and sub-mucosa specific expression groups. selected go bp terms enriched in each cluster are shown. (iii) selected cell type prediction distribution over distance/depth score (inset and legend: st slide overlay showing distance measures from muscularis mucosa used to assign each spot a distance gradient colored by depth score overlaid over h&e image from st section a1, full image available in (fawknercorbett et al., 2020) in adult st showing sequential distribution of cell types, predicted using adult single cell references from (parikh et al., 2019, geo: gse116222) and (kinchen et al., 2018, geo: gse114374) and (smillie et al., 2019, duos-000110) (d) as in (c)(iii), distance/depth score applied to fetal st slides (inset and legend: st slide overlay showing distance measures from serosa used to assign each spot a distance gradient colored by depth score), showing selected cell type distribution across tissue depth from serosal membrane to lumen in samples from 12 pcw colon (i) and 19 pcw colon (ii). inset spot overlay is shown over selected areas from h&e images from st sections a8 (i) and a4 (ii). full images are available in (fawkner-corbett et al., 2020).']. Reference sentences:[analyses of transcriptional signatures of st spots identified 5– 13 spot clusters in each slide which mapped to discrete locations (figure 2a star methods).this localized well-characterized cell types such as iscs at the crypt bottom (figures 2ai and 2aii) foxf2- muscularis cells in the outer muscle (figure 2aiii) and best4/otop2 cells toward the crypt top (figure 2aiv).furthermore individual gene expression aligned with morphology; ret showed spot-specific expression at myenteric plexuses and ptprc (cd45) at submucosal lymphoid follicles (figure 2b).pairwise cell-type signal correlation analysis highlighted sig- nificant same-spot co-occurrence of several cell types (e.g. best4/otop2 cells and colonocytes) in line with expected in situ cell localization (figure 2ci).in fetal st notable differences included the outer and inner muscularis signatures occupying discrete spatial layers at 19 but not 12 pcw (figure 2d).(g) partition-based graph abstraction (star methods) of 101 cell clusters identified in scrna-seq data (colored by compartment line representing weight of interaction legend for cell cluster annotation table s1) ll open access 812 cell 184 810–826 february 4 2021 resource figure 2.this was confirmed by pairwise cell- type signal correlation analysis (star methods) where ecs pericytes and ‘‘s3’’ type fibroblast signals correlated within the same st spots (figure 2ci).areas highlighted as anatomical reference points (e.g. myenteric plexus figure 2b) had images discussed with a pediatric pathol- ogist (d.f.)]
Patterns related to cell type signal correlations and gene expression across tissue depth were analyzed in single-cell transcriptomics data.

Text 553
10.1038/s41422-020-00445-x
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 6 tissue and subset specific profile of ilc1. a umap visualization of annotated ilc1 and nk cell clusters. clusters are color coded based on annotated clusters (fig 1e). b modules highly correlated with ilc1 and nk cells. the figure shows a selection of genes per module, and their level of expression within annotated clusters (fig 1e).']. Reference sentences:[gene modules reveal subset- and tissue-specific profiles of ilc1- like cells module 32 contained transcripts which were uniquely expressed by putative ilc1 and eomes+ ilc1 in blood and tonsil (fig 6a b).notably the transcripts in this module were expressed by few lung ilc1 suggesting that blood and tonsil ilc1 have more pronounced t cell features than lung ilc1 (fig 6b).furthermore indicating that blood and tonsil ilc1 and in particular eomes+ ilc1 are more related to nk cells than lung ilc1 two additional transcriptional modules (fig 6b) revealed transcripts expressed in nk cells as well as in ilc1 and eomes+ ilc1 in blood and tonsil and to a lesser extent by ilc1 in lung (fig 6b).]
Patterns of gene expression modules correlated with ilc1 and nk cells, showing subset- and tissue-specific profiles.

Text 554
10.1038/s41422-020-00445-x
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 4 tissue- and subset-specific profile of ilc2. a umap visualization of annotated ilc2 clusters (l_, lung; b_, blood; t_, tonsil). clusters are color coded based on annotated clusters (fig 1e). b modules highly correlated with ilc2 or tissue. the figure shows a selection of genes per module, and their level of expression within annotated clusters (fig 1e). data are from ten independent experiments with one tissue donor each (blood = 3, lung = 4 and colon = 3) integrated with data from.12']. Reference sentences:[article 558 cell research (2021) 31:554 – 568 gene modules reveal subset- and tissue-specific profiles of ilc2 our gene module approach identified a set of genes that were specifically expressed in ilc2 across the three tissues (fig 4a b) making up an ilc2 core transcriptome.finally we identified a module of genes (number 65) specifically expressed in lung but not tonsil or blood ilc2 (fig 4b).]
Patterns of gene modules highly correlated with ilc2 or tissue-specific profiles across different cells.

Text 555
10.1038/s41556-020-00613-6
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 3 | scrna-seq reveals heterogeneity in immune components. a, tsne view of monocytic cells, colour-coded by subtypes. b, correlation of monocytic cell clusters with bulk rna-seq on different sorted immune cells26. c, smoothened distribution of monocytic-cell-related marker gene abundance. d, correlation between the m1 and m2 signatures, where each dot represents a cell. two-sided p values are calculated for spearman’s rank correlation and not adjusted for multiple comparisons. e, differentially activated pathways among all the tam clusters. only pathways with activation score higher than 0.1 are shown. f,g, tsne view of 3,116 t cells, colour-coded by re-evaluated clusters (f) and expression level of marker genes (g). h, characterization of different t-cell populations, with clusters ordered and grouped by subtypes. top: smoothened distribution of klk3 abundance. middle: subtype-specific modules, with representative enrichment of module genes, grouped by subtype, shown at the right. bottom: relative activation of immune-related pathways in each cluster. see also extended data fig 5 and supplementary table 2.']. Reference sentences:[most clusters consisted of cells from multiple patients indicating an unbiased cell subpopulation representation (extended data fig 3a).the pam50 luminal a and b signatures show a high signal for most of the clusters simultaneously except clusters 10 and 12 (extended data fig 3b).we therefore next derived signatures representative of these subpopulations (methods and extended data fig 3c).interestingly marker genes of cluster 12 including the known cell-cycle-related genes cdc20 ccnb1 cenpf and pttg1 are enriched with terms related to cell division (extended data fig 3d) indicating differ- ences in cell-cycle regulation.consistent with a previous study24 cellcycle is predictive of dis- ease outcome across multiple cohorts (fig 2d and extended data fig 3e).see also extended data fig 3 and 4.to further characterize the monocytic clusters (fig 3a) we com- pared their averaged abundance with bulk profiles on sorted cells26 and inspected the expression of canonical marker genes.cluster 1 showed the highest correlation with myeloid dendritic cells while all the others were most highly associated with monocytes (fig 3b).all clusters showed high levels of hla-dra and cd68 and all the monocytes but not dendritic cells showed high levels of cd14 and fcgr3a (fig 3c).together we assigned the cells into three sub- types: monocyte cells dendritic cells (dcs) and tumour-associated macrophages (tams) (fig 3a).we observed a mixture of m1 and m2 signal activation among tams (fig 3c) with a strong posi- tive correlation between the two signals (fig 3d) in line with recent studies in human cancers showing that tams co-express m1 and m2 signals727.nevertheless notable heterogeneity exists among tam clusters and important pathways involved in macrophage function and activation including tumour necrosis factor (tnf) nuclear factor (nf)-κb nucleotide oligomerization domain- and toll-like receptor signalling are regulated differently (fig 3e).t cells can be subtyped into cd4+ t conventional (tconv) cd4+ t regulatory (treg) cd8+ t naive and cd8+ t effector cells accord- ing to marker gene expression (fig 3fg).cluster 5 is the least activated subtype with the lowest levels of most metabo- lism and immune pathways while cluster 3 shows the characteris- tics of highly activated t cells (fig 3h and extended data fig 5c).analysis of subtype-specific modules showed significant enrich- ment of terms associated with their respective functions (fig 3h and supplementary table 2).module 61 is the only one specific to klk3-high t-cell clusters with gradient activation corresponding to klk3 abundance (fig 3h).notably the statistically enriched terms in this module are related to extracellular vesicle (ev) and exosome (fig 3h and supplementary table 2).we detected klk3 expression in all t-cell subgroups hinting that the effect of evs might accompany different stages of tumour-infiltrating t cells (fig 3h).]
Patterns related to correlation between monocytic cell clusters and bulk RNA-seq on sorted immune cells, as well as correlation between m1 and m2 signatures in tams, were observed.

Text 556
10.1038/s41556-020-00613-6
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 2 | purified signature derived from single-cell data and the association with survival. a, tsne view of 23,674 epithelial cells, colour-coded by re-evaluated clusters, with colour shading highlighting clusters of cellcycle and basal/intermediate subtypes. b, marker gene expression for the three epithelial subtypes. c, differentially activated pathways among the epithelial subtypes, with ‘b’, ‘c’ and ‘l’ representing basal/intermediate, cellcycle and luminal, respectively. d,e, comparison of biochemical recurrence (bcr)-free rates for the high and low groups, stratified using the cellcycle (d) and basal/intermediate (e) signatures in tcga. p values are calculated using the cox proportional hazard model (coxph) and are not adjusted for multiple comparisons. numbers in parentheses show 95% confidence intervals (cis) for hazard ratios (hrs). f, smoothened distribution of ccl2 expression, with tme and epithelial cells grouped by their assigned cell types and clusters, respectively. cell numbers are shown for epithelial clusters 10 and 15 above the violin plots. a one-sided fisher’s exact test is used to examine enrichment of ccl2 expression in cluster 10. p<2.2×10−16; or=21.64. g, smoothened distribution of ccl2 expression in different samples (top) and number of basal/intermediate cells as a bar plot (bottom). h, correlation between ccl2 expression and basal/intermediate signature in tcga. i, correlation between t cell and basal/intermediate signature. two-sided p values are calculated for spearman’s rank correlation and not adjusted for multiple comparisons. see also extended data figs. 3 and 4.']. Reference sentences:[interestingly besides canonical kera- tin genes we observed expression of t-cell co-stimulatory genes in luminal cells (fig 1b and extended data fig 2a) hinting at a poten- tial role of epithelial cells involved in antigen presentation.as expected luminal is the dominant epithelial type for most tumours (fig 1e and extended data fig 2b).in addition a high sig- nal for the pam50 basal signature is observed for non-epithelial components in our data (extended data fig 2c) suggesting con- tamination of the stromal signal in the signature10.similarly a high gleason score (gs)-related gene signature derived from a previous microdissection analysis20 was highest in stroma with 3 of 19 genes preferentially expressed in tme cells (extended data fig 2de).epithelial cells including both basal/intermediate and luminal types were re-analysed yielding 16 clusters (fig 2a).cluster 10 alone has high expression of basal/inter- mediate specific marker genes (krt5 krt14 krt19 and tp63; fig 2b) and was named ‘basal/intermediate cells’.compared with the other luminal cells cellcycle and basal/intermediate cells show distinctive cell func- tions (fig 2c).the basal/intermediate cells are particularly associated with antigen processing and presen- tation (fig 2c).consistent with a previous study24 cellcycle is predictive of dis- ease outcome across multiple cohorts (fig 2d and extended data fig 3e).in line with luminal a being indicative of longer recurrence-free survival6 a high basal/intermediate signature is associated with better survival (fig 2e and extended data fig 4a).as basal/inter- mediate cells show high expression of antigen processing and pre- sentation genes (fig 2c) we investigated immune regulation-related genes.both hla class ii and the chemokine gene ccl2 are specifi- cally expressed in basal/intermediate cells (fig 2b).notably basal/ intermediate cells are the main cell population expressing ccl2 (fig 2fg) and in the two samples with the least basal/intermedi- ate cell content ccl2 expression is not detected.expression of ccl2 is also significantly associated with content of basal/interme- diate cells in bulk sequencing data (fig 2h).as expected strong correlations were observed across multiple cohorts (fig 2i and extended data fig 4c).b smoothened distribution for four prostate cancer related signatures in epithelial cell clusters as defined in fig 2a.]
Correlation between basal/intermediate signature and ccl2 expression in epithelial cells.

Text 557
10.1038/s41556-020-00613-6
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 6 | aec cells undergo ecm remodelling and are enriched in crpc. a,b, tsne view of ecs from normal-crpc samples, colour-coded by clusters (a) and marker gene expression (b). c, qusage scores, indicating similarities among ec clusters in batch 1 and 3 data. d, top: all ecs from normal-crpc samples ordered along pseudotime trajectories, colour-coded by clusters. bottom: schematics of the trajectories, with pie chart colour-coded by average pseudotime and percentage of cells from crpc samples in the indicated cluster. two-sided p values are calculated for spearman’s rank correlation and not adjusted for multiple comparisons. e, differential activation of focal adhesion and ecm–receptor interaction pathways among all seven ec clusters. f, dot plots of flow cytometry showing percentage of cd31+ and cd90+ aecs in normal, primary prostate adenocarcinoma (adpc) and castration-resistant prostate cancer (crpc) samples. g, quantification of aec percentage in f. p values (student’s t-test, n=4 independent samples, two-sided) for normal versus adpc and adpc versus crpc are 0.033 and 0.001, respectively. h, number of invading fields after pc3 co-culture with parental or cd31+/cd90+ aec cells. data are taken from three replicates. p=0.025 (student’s t-test, n=11 fields examined, two-sided). statistical data relevant to g and h are provided in the source data.']. Reference sentences:[we used flow cytometry to isolate psma-positive t cells from tumour tissues (extended data fig 6ab).to test the capacity of tumour cells to alter t-cell gene expression profiles we cultured t cells sorted from healthy donors (methods) together with two prostate cancer cell lines (extended data fig 6cd) and examined the klk3 abundance in t cells after 24 h. co-culturing with the ar-positive c4-2b but not the ar-negative tumour 0 1000 2000 3000 35 402 192 310 733 241 110 12 45 2552 left ln 0 500 1000 1500 606 87 0 6 17 9 1209 right ln 0 endothelia fibroblast mast monocytic myofibroblast neutrophil pdc plasma t b 2 1 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 20 1 klk3 klk3/dapi ec4-2b edu145 ctrl no.see also extended data fig 6.additionally immunofluorescent staining revealed localization of psa in cd8+ t cells co-cultured with evs from c4-2b but not du145 cells (extended data fig 6e).a discontinuous ultracentri- fugation iodixanol gradient of the ev-containing pellet shows that both the klk3 rna and protein are predominantly present in the vesicles but not in the ev free fractions which are known to con- tain soluble material (methods and extended data fig 6fg).cells from tumour show distinct separation from ln samples (extended data fig 6hi).in line with the expression being ev-mediated the abundance of klk3 in t cells and the rest of the tme are much lower than in epithelial cells (extended data fig 6j–l).of invasing cells per field cd31+/ cd90+ p = 0.025 normal adpc crpc 0 2 4 6 % cd31/cd90+ cells p = 0.033 p = 0.001 20 0 20 25 0 25 50 dimension 1 dimension 2 543210 6 10 6 q1 q4 q3 0.030 11.0 88.6 q1 96.7 q1 58.8 q4 35.6 q4 1.25 q2 0.34 q2 2.06 q2 3.99 q3 1.67 q3 0.019 10 5 10 4 10 3 10 2 10 2 10 3 10 4 comp-fl1-h :: b525-fitc-h normal adpc fitc-cd31 crpc comp-flb-h :: y763-pc7-h pe/cy7-cd90 10 6 10 5 10 4 10 3 10 2 10 2 10 3 10 4 comp-fl1-h :: b525-fitc-h comp-flb-h :: y763-pc7-h 10 6 10 5 10 4 10 3 10 2 10 2 10 3 10 4 comp-fl1-h :: b525-fitc-h comp-flb-h :: y763-pc7-h 1 3 2 fig 6 | aec cells undergo ecm remodelling and are enriched in crpc.we performed scrna-seq of six prostate tissues obtained during radical cystectomy for blad- der cancer and five tumours from crpc patients (fig 6ab and supplementary table 1 batch 3).we detected thy1-positive subsets resembling the aec population in this normal-crpc cohort (fig 6c).strikingly the two aec clusters (0 and 1) consisted mostly of cells from crpc samples (fig 6d).activation of the ecm–receptor interaction and focal adhesion pathways was also observed in the aec subsets (fig 6e).consistent with our analysis a significantly higher fraction of aecs were isolated from crpc compared to adpc and normal prostate samples (fig 6fg; student’s test p = 0.001 and 0.033 respectively).as expected a significantly (student’s test p = 0.025) increased invasion was observed in the aec co-culture condition (fig 6h).the gating strategy to identify the different cell types is shown in extended data fig 6a.the gating strategy to identify different cell types is shown in fig 6f.statistical data relevant to extended data fig 6c-d g are provided in the source data.unprocessed western blots relevant to extended data fig 6f are provided in the source data.]
Patterns related to correlation among aec clusters in crpc samples, enriched in ecm remodelling, and differential activation of pathways.

Text 558
10.1016/j.celrep.2020.108573
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 2. population-level developmental stage scoring places ucb and infant immune cells intermediate between fetal and adult fetal and adult peripheral blood (pb) naive cd4 t cell and classical monocytes were transcriptionally profiled by microarray. genes differentially expressed across ages within both cell types were used to build a developmental stage score model that was then used to score fetal-to-adult transition progress of new samples. see also figures s1 and s2. (a) heatmap showing relative expression of top differentially expressed genes within individual samples. bolded genes were used for developmental stage scoring. (b and c) developmental stage scores of naive cd4 t cells and classical monocytes from fetal and adult samples (b; n = 3 each) or from ucb samples (c; t cells n = 29, monocytes n = 27). points are score from bulk analysis of individual samples. bars are mean and standard error of the mean (sem). (d) scatterplot showing correlation between developmental stage scores of ucb naive cd4 t cells and monocytes from the same samples (n = 27). pearson correlation coefficient (r), associated p value, and least-squares regression line are shown. (e) scatterplot showing correlation between developmental stage score and gestational age from t cells of a larger birth cohort (n = 405 samples). points are score from bulk analysis of individual samples. the r, associated p value, and least-squares regression line are shown. (f) developmental stage scoring of naive cd4 t cell samples tracked longitudinally. black lines indicate individuals (n = 15); heavier red line indicates mean value at a given time point.']. Reference sentences:[after validation and optimization testing of qrt-pcr primers a set of 33 genes shared between monocytes and t cells met criteria to represent a fetal versus adult transcrip- tional signature (figure 2a).we further demonstrated that naive cd4 and classical monocyte populations sorted from newly processed fetal tissue (spleen or bm) and adult peripheral blood subjected to qrt-pcr and analyzed for developmental stage score also scored appropriately as highly fetal or adult (figure 2b).although we observed a wide range of inter-individ- ual variability among samples this variability across ucb cd4 t cell and monocyte populations was less than the variation be- tween fetal and adult samples (figure 2c).we also found that within a given individual there was a significant correlation between t cell and monocyte signa- ture scores suggesting that the fetal-to-adult transition of these hematopoietic lineages may be under control of a shared regula- tory mechanism (figure 2d).a wide range of variability at any given a b c d e f figure 2.4 cell reports 34 108573 january 5 2021 resource ll open access ga was observed as well as a significant positive correlation be- tween developmental stage score and ga at birth for t cells but not monocytes (figure 2e).developmental stage scoring analysis performed on naive cd4 t cells collected longi- tudinally for the first several months of life revealed a steady tran- sition in developmental stage scores beginning with a largely fetal signature and transitioning to a more adult-like signature within 1–2 months (figure 2f).finally to address the potential confounder of tissue origin in the rna-seq datasets (i.e. fetal spleen versus blood for newborn and adult samples) we utilized the differentially expressed genes from our prior microarray anal- ysis (figure 2) to compare expression between circulating and tissue-derived fetal t cells and found that genes differentially ex- pressed between circulating fetal-versus-adult cells could discriminate expression patterns in fetal spleen- versus newborn ucb- and versus adult peripheral blood-derived t cells analyzed by bulk rna-seq (figures s5b–s5d).in light of findings presented here that ucb t cells retain a partial treg-associated transcriptome (fig- ure 6) that variable bulk transcriptional signatures were detected in two distinct hematopoietic lineages (lymphoid and myeloid; figure 2) and that fetal hspcs give rise to t cells with transcrip- tional and functional characteristics of fetal t cells (mold et al. 2010) we analyzed cd34+ hspc cell populations with cell- type-specific single-cell transcriptional developmental stage score analysis to determine whether progenitor cell populations also undergo gradual progressive transition from fetal to adult identity.although the overall increase in mean bulk developmental stage scoring of at-birth ucb versus 2-week-old peripheral blood naive t cells was about the same as the difference between 2- versus 4-week-old peripheral blood (figure 2f) it will be important to follow up in newborn peripheral blood samples to determine whether ucb-specific signaling pathways remain expressed in the days and weeks after birth and whether gene expression is altered after delivery by caesarean section in the absence of labor.]
Correlation between developmental stage scores of different cell types and gestational age, suggesting shared regulatory mechanisms in fetal-to-adult transition.

Text 559
10.1038/s41556-020-00619-0
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 7 | transcription profiles of cervical sccs and adcs correlate with squamous and columnar epithelial lineages. a, gene expression profiles of scc and adc correlate well with genes differentially expressed between ecto- and endocervical organoids, respectively. colour bar denotes z-scored gene expression. b, heat map showing the mean-substracted expression for selected bimodal genes in cancer samples that were differentially expressed in squamous and columnar organoids. colour bar denotes fold change from mean gene expression across all samples. in a,b, up-ectocervical organoids denote genes that are upregulated in ectocerival organoids compared to endocervical organoids; up-endocervical organoids denote genes that are upregulated in endocerival organoids compared to ectocervical organoids. c,d, gene expression profiles of proposed scj markers together with krt5 in cervical organoids (c) and 178 cervical cancer samples (d). expression of these markers was higher in endocervical organoids (n=6) and adcs (n=34) compared with ectocervical organoids (n=10) and sccs (n=144), in contrast to krt5 expression; box hinges correspond to first and third quartiles, the centre line corresponds to the median value, and whiskers correspond to the largest or smallest value within 1.5×the interquartile range from the hinges. all other outlying values are shown as individual points. statistical significance was determined by a two-sided mann–whitney u test with no adjustments. p<0.001, except for agr2 in c (p=0.073).']. Reference sentences:[we observed an emergence of subcolum- nar krt5+ krt17+ and p63+ cells which were negative for krt8 (fig 6f–n and extended data fig 7d).axin2 which is typically expressed in the endocervix remained unaltered and expression of krt8 and krt7 was restricted to the columnar epithelium (fig 6fk–m and extended data fig 7ef).we found an agree- ment between cancers classified as columnar-like or squamous-like and their histological classification as adc or scc respectively; this was also evident from comparison with the tcga clusters of adc or keratin-high and keratin-low groups (fig 7a and extended data fig 8de).a group of cases with a low tumour content which showed no apparent similarity with either ectocervical or endocer- vical signatures were classified as undetermined (fig 7a extended data fig 8c and supplementary table 14).notably cancer samples classified as columnar-like were mainly krt5low krt7high and tp63low whereas samples classified as squamous-like and undetermined were mainly krt5high and tp63high with a mixed krt7 status (fig 7a and extended data fig 8de).we observed bimodal gene expression in columnar-like and squamous-like cancers including muc5b krt5 and csta that differentiates adc from scc (fig 7b).statistical source data are provided in source data extended data fig 7.]
Patterns of gene expression correlate with epithelial lineages in cervical cancer, distinguishing squamous and columnar-like cells.

Text 560
10.1038/s41590-020-00836-7
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 5 | the chromatin states of teff cells are found on a continuum. a, scatac-seq of total lp cd4+ t cells from salmonella-infected mice. umap representation with treg cells and naive tconv cells identified (top) based on gene activity at prototypic loci (bottom). b, cell chromatin scores for rorc and tbx21 loci, computed from the accessibility of expression-correlated ocrs. top, scores in th0, th1 and th17 cells differentiated in vitro. n=4 biological replicates for each condition. center, median; box limits, first and third percentiles; whiskers, 1.5× interquartile range. bottom, scores for each cell in the scatac-seq data from a (teff only) in a umap plot. c, aggregated coverage maps around rorc and tbx21 loci in teff cells, split based according to their chromatin score at each locus (shown at left); arrows, locations of the best expression-correlated ocrs used to compute the scores. d, over-representation in each teff cell (data from a) of tf-binding motifs in accessible chromatin (tf motif deviation scores that were bias-corrected by chromvar28) for classic master regulators (umap framework from b). e, combined variability across the teff scatac-seq data for ocrs that contain motifs for different tfs (blue, null distribution for permuted dataset). tf families across the ranking shown at right. f, tf motif deviation scores per teff cell (as in d) for fos and irf4 motifs.']. Reference sentences:[first a pca showed that the gene sets in the principal components (pcs) with the most variance contained few th-associated signature genes (extended data fig 5a).the transcripts for some cytokines did show significant positive coex- pression (il4 or il5 and il13; il17a and il17f; extended data fig 5b).but when projected across the cell space most mod- ules showed broadly differential representation as a gradient across all cells cutting across cells expressing ifng or il17a transcripts (extended data fig 5d with the exception of cell cycle genes in m1 and m2 the mhc-ii module in m9 and the th2-like cluster in m7).as with scrna-seq three distinct clus- ters could be distinguished by clustering and identification based on the accessibility of typical indicator genes (treg naive tconv cells and a cloud of teff cells; fig 5a).we validated these scores by showing that they clearly distin- guished atac-seq profiles from in vitro-derived th1 and th17 cells (fig 5b top).however when projected on the umap plot of ex vivo teff cells the tbx21 and rorc scores were broadly distributed with diffuse local maxima but no cell cluster displayed either exclusively (fig 5b bottom).clearly chromatin openness at one locus was independent of the state at the other locus (fig 5c).t-bet and gata3 motif scores were broadly distributed (fig 5d) with a more concentrated over-representation of rorγ motif scores (acknowledging the caveat that these motifs may be recognized by the related tfs eomes and rorα respectively).we broadened the analy- sis to all tf motifs in the jaspar database ranking them by their overall variability (null distribution from randomized data; fig 5e).correspondingly scores for fos and irf4 motifs segregated most distinctly (fig 5f).f contour plot representing rna and protein expression in the single-cell data from fig 5 (x axis normalized scrna-seq; y axis raw cellular indexing of transcriptomes and epitopes by sequencing (cite-seq) counts) for mhc-ii (top) or cd14 (bottom).the ten matrices (one for each replicate and condition) of pairwise gene– gene correlations were then averaged for extended data fig 5c.to calculate the tbx21 and rorc scores shown in fig 5b we counted the raw reads falling into 300-bp intervals centered on ocrs that were highly correlated with the expression of corresponding genes in the immgen compendium (according to supplementary tables 3f and ref.for the rorc locus signals at three ocrs with tss gene–ocr correlation scores >10 were used and for the tbx21 locus 11 ocrs with tss gene–ocr scores >15 were used (fig 5c).]
Patterns related to correlation between chromatin accessibility and gene expression in teff cells are shown, with distinct tf motif scores and variability across tf families.

Text 561
10.1038/s41591-020-01212-6
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 4 | limited immune infiltration and features of antitumor immunity in sys tumors. a, t-sne of immune and stroma cell profiles (dots), colored by inferred cell type (left) or sample (right). b, cytotoxicity and exhaustion scores of sys cd8+ t cells, colored by the t cell expansion program score. the latter is associated with high cytotoxicity and lower-than-expected exhaustion (p<1 × 10−11, mixed-effects). c, distribution of effector versus exhaustion scores (top) or an immune checkpoint blockade responsiveness program39 (bottom) in cd8+ t cells from sys (orange) and melanoma (green); p value, mixed-effects test. d, overall expression of the immune signatures in sys tumors and other cancer types (controlling for variation in the mutational load; left) or other sarcomas (right) (baird et al. 2005, ref. 58). e, inferred level of immune cell types is associated with the malignant programs in bulk sys tumors, when controlling for tumor purity. partial correlation (color bar) between the inferred level of each immune subset (rows) and the core oncogenic and differentiation levels (columns). f–h, geomx cancer transcriptome atlas and whole transcriptome atlas in situ profiling reveals that the core oncogenic program (cop) is associated with reduced immune infiltrates. f, representative cd45+ staining in cop-high and cop-low tumor niches; the trend was observed across 244 rois in 9 sys tumors, as shown in g and h. g, the expression of the cop in malignant cd45– aois stratified according to the immune-cell abundance in the pertaining roi, with the number of rois in parentheses. p values, mixed-effects test. ta, transcriptome atlas. h, association of gene expression in malignant cd45– aois with immune abundance in the pertaining roi. in d and g: middle line, median; box edges, 25th and 75th percentiles; whiskers, most extreme points that do not exceed ±iqr × 1.5; further outliers are marked individually. n.s., not significant.']. Reference sentences:[to test the first possibility we examined cd8+ t cell states (fig 4a and supplementary table 4) and found hallmarks of antitumor immunity and recognition.t cell subsets spanned naive cyto- toxic exhausted and regulatory states (fig 4b and methods) with expansion based on tcr reconstruction38 (72 observed clones all patient-specific with shared clones between matched samples from the same patient; extended data fig 4a) and unique transcriptional features of an effector-like non-exhausted state (fig 4b extended data fig 4b and supplementary table 4).notably sys-specific ctas were expressed in large fractions of malignant cells (extended data fig 4c).compared with cd8+ t cells from melanoma30 cd8+ t cells in sys (1) overexpressed a program characterizing t cells in melanoma tumors that were responsive to immune checkpoint blockade39 (p = 1.22 × 10−10 mixed-effects) (fig 4c bottom) (2) overexpressed effector and cytotoxic gene modules4041 (for example gzmb cx3cr1 p = 6.36 × 10−9 mixed-effects); and (3) underex- pressed exhaustion markers (p = 6.36 × 10−3 mixed-effects) and checkpoint genes (ctla4 havcr2 lag3 pdcd1 tigit and layn)40 (p = 7.69 × 10−7 mixed-effects) (fig 4c top).among other immune cells macrophages spanned m1- and m2- like states42 with pro- and anti-inflammatory features respectively (extended data fig 4d–f methods and supplementary table 4) and expressed relatively high levels of tnf (p = 1.13 × 10−7 mixed- effects; more than fourfold higher than melanoma macrophages) tumor cycling core oncogenic −40 −20 0 20 40 t-sne 1 −40 −20 0 20 40 t-sne 1 −40 −20 0 20 40 t-sne 1 −40 −20 0 20 40 t-sne 1 a b c d −40 −20 0 20 40 t-sne 2 h epithelial versus mesenchymal overall expression e f g −1 0 1 2 3 −1.0 −0.5 0 0.5 1.0 differentiation score differentiation trajectories 0 1 2 3 4 0 1 2 3 4 g1/s g2/m low high low high low high overall expression low high overall expression cell cycle low high cell cycle epithelial versus mes.sys tumors showed extremely low levels of immune cells which could not be explained by variation in the mutational load (fig 4d and extended data fig 4g) (p = 2.58 × 10−11 mixed-effects accounting for mutational load) and despite malignant-cell expres- sion of ctas (extended data fig 4c).unlike melanoma (extended data fig 4h left) t cell levels were not correlated with prognosis in sys (extended data fig 4h right) perhaps because they do not cross the critical threshold for clinical impact.first from our inferred composition of sys tumors in pub- lished cohorts1620 (methods) we found that the levels of immune infiltrates were correlated with lower core oncogenic and cell cycle program scores and higher differentiation scores (p < 5.34 × 10−3 r = −0.44 −0.36 and 0.48 respectively partial pearson correlation conditioning on inferred tumor purity) (methods and fig 4e).two of the tumors (sys11 and sys2) were also profiled in situ for >18000 genes using the geomx whole transcriptome atlas (methods and fig 4fg).we first stained tumor sections with markers for immune (cd45) and epithelial (panck) compartments then defined immune (cd45+) and non-immune (cd45−) cells classified cd45− cells as malig- nant on the basis of cytonuclear atypia and distinguished them as epithelial (panck+) and non-epithelial (panck−) (fig 4f).we observed an inverse spatial correlation between the expression of the core oncogenic program in the malignant cells (cd45− aois) in a given roi and cd45+ cell abundance in the same roi (p = 3.54 × 10−14 mixed-effects r = −0.67 p < 1 × 10−6 partial spearman correlation for overall expression of the program depicted in fig 4fg; p < 1 × 10−6 hypergeometric test at the single-gene level depicted in fig 4h).we confirmed these findings with multiplexed immunofluorescence (tissue-based cyclic immunoflu- orescence t-cycif)45 (p < 1 × 10−10 mixed-effects) (extended data fig 4i and methods).next to control for the association between the expression of exhaustion and cytotoxicity markers we estimated the relationship between the cytotoxicity and exhaustion scores using locally-weighted polynomial regression (lowess black line in fig 4b).]
Patterns related to correlation between immune infiltrates and core oncogenic programs in single-cell tumors.

Text 562
10.1186/s13059-021-02267-5
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 4 identifying cell clusters by principal component analysis and evaluating scope2 quantification. a a weighted principal component analysis (pca) of 1490 single cells using all 3042 proteins quantified across multiple single cells. missing values were imputed using k-nearest neighbor (k = 3). cells are colored by cell type. b the cells from the pca in a are color-coded based on the abundance of monocyte and macrophage genes, defined as the 30 most differential proteins between bulk samples of monocytes and macrophages. c the relative protein levels (macrophage/monocyte protein ratios) estimated from the single cells correlate to the corresponding estimates from bulk samples; ρ denotes pearson correlation. proteins functioning in signaling (d) as well as the least abundant proteins quantified by scope2 (e) allow clustering cells by cell type. the protein fold changes between monocytes and macrophages for these protein sets are consistent between single cells and bulk samples, similar to c']. Reference sentences:[as a first approach we performed principal component analysis (pca) fig 4a.color-coding the cells by their labels indicates that the clusters correspond to the monocytes and the macrophages fig 4a.to evaluate whether we can assign cell types based on the abundance of monocyte and macrophage associated proteins we color-coded each cell by the median abundance of proteins identi- fied to be differentially abundant from analyzing bulk samples of monocytes and macro- phages fig 4b.genome biology (2021) 22:50 page 9 of 27 single-cell data to compute monocytes/macrophages protein fold changes and com- pared these estimates to the corresponding fold changes measured from bulk samples i.e. averaging across single cells by physically mixing their lysates fig 4c.in principle the cell type classification in fig 4a b may be driven by relatively few abundant structural proteins while less abundant regulatory proteins such as kinases receptors and transcription factors might be poorly quantified.to evaluate this possi- bility we applied the pca analysis using only proteins functioning in signaling (fig 4d) or only the least abundant proteins quantified by scope2 (fig 4e).the results indicate that these protein groups also correctly classify cell types (fig 4d e) albeit the fraction of variance captured by pc1 is lower for the signaling proteins (24%) shown in fig 4d.the relative quantification of proteins from both sets correlates positively (ρ = 0.75 ρ = 0.72) to the corresponding bulk protein ratios fig 4de.indeed the protein fold changes estimated from the scope2 data agree well with the correspond- ing estimates from conventional bulk methods fig 1c and fig 4c.the reliability of data from scope2 opens the potential not only to identify and clas- sify cell sub-populations but to go beyond such descriptive analysis: accurate protein table 1 scope2 improves quantitative accuracy depth of proteome coverage ease of sample preparation and cost-effectiveness 2–10-fold over scope-ms. quantitative accuracy is evaluated by comparing relative protein ratios from in silico averaged single cells to bulk data shown in fig 4c.this list of proteins constitutes the “monocyte genes” and the “macrophage genes” displayed in fig 4b.]
Summary: Correlation between protein levels in single cells and bulk samples, allowing accurate cell type classification based on protein abundance.

Text 563
10.1186/s13059-021-02267-5
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 7 exploring transcriptional and post-transcriptional regulation in single cells. a a total of 1490 cells analyzed by 10× genomics were ordered based on the loadings of their first common principal component (cpc 1) and the abundance of ncl mrna displayed. similarly, 1490 cells analyzed by scope2 were ordered based on cpc 1, and the abundance of ncl protein displayed. cells having the same rank were paired to display the joint distribution of ncl. b–d the same analysis as in a was performed for rhoc, tnfsf13b, and tp53. e distributions of correlations between p53 protein (or the tp53 rna) and the rna levels of its target genes. the target genes are subset into those whose transcription is repressed by p53 (blue dotted boxplots) and those whose transcription is activated by the p53 (red boxplots). the correlations for p53 protein and tp53 mrna are significantly (p < 0.001) different']. Reference sentences:[to distinguish between these possibilities we computed the pairwise correlations between monocytes and those between macrophages fig 7a.the lower pairwise-pairwise correlations between macrophages suggest that indeed differentiation increases heterogeneity fig 7a.thus we ordered the cells based on the loadings of their common first principal components and paired cells having the same rank as shown in fig 7a for ncl.for this gene the protein and rna abundances exhibit similar trends as reflected in a correlated joint distribution fig 7a.some less abundant genes from cluster 1 also exhibit similar trends though with more discrete variability at the rna level as exemplified with rhoc fig 7b.genome biology (2021) 22:50 page 14 of 27 other genes (particularly from cluster 2 as defined in fig 6b) show more divergent trends in their rna and protein profiles as exemplified by tnfsf13b (fig 7c) and by the tumor suppressor protein p53 (fig 7d).for p53 (encoded by tp53) the protein abundance correlates positively to the activated targets and negatively to the repressed targets fig 7e.in contrast the correlations between the mrna coding for p53 differ from the expectation (fig 7c) consistent with recent observations [50].the data in fig 7a and indicate that u-937-derived macrophages are more heterogeneous than their precursor monocytes.genome biology (2021) 22:50 page 16 of 27 quantification across thousands of single cells may provide sufficient data for studying transcriptional and post-transcriptional regulation in single cells and for inferring direct causal mechanisms in biological systems [6 8 52] as suggested by the results in fig 7.the single cells in all panels of fig 6 and fig 7 were ordered by the corresponding right principal components computed by multiplying each dataset with cpc 1.]
Summary: Correlations between protein and RNA levels of specific genes, such as p53, and their target genes in single cells were analyzed.

Text 564
10.1038/s42003-020-01625-6
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 1 single-cell rna sequencing results from immune cells in ccrcc. a umap of 37,055 primary immune cells of peripheral blood, normal renal parenchyma and tumor-infiltrating ccrcc patients. b distribution of cells by tissue type, peripheral blood (blue), tumor (red), and kidney (light blue). arrows indicated potential enriched or unique immune cells populations for tissue type. c percent of cells expressing canonical immune cell markers across the umap. d normalized correlation values for predicted immune cell phenotypes based on the singler r package for each cluster; dendrogram based on euclidean distance. e umap demonstrating inferred immune cell types in ccrcc, clusters are colored by cell type and proportion of single-cell per sequencing run by tissue type. p values based on one-way anova; lack of labeled p values equates to value >0.05.']. Reference sentences:[the general workﬂow for iso- lation and sequencing is available in supplementary fig 1.to these samples we added immune cells from peripheral blood and normal renal parenchyma30 to obtain an integrated umap projection of 22 clusters across 37055 primary immune cells (fig 1a).across the three tissues peripheral blood (n = 21160) tumor (n = 12239) and normal kidney (n = 3556) we found a number of clusters—notably clusters 0 1 3 and 7—sharing similar gene expression (fig 1b).based on gene expression we assigned cell lineages to each cluster using a three-method approach: (1) expressions of canonical markers for t cells (cd3e cd8a cd4 and il7r or cd127) b cells (cd19 and ms4a1) myeloid cells (cd14 and fcgr3a or cd16) and natural killer (nk) cells (klrd1 and nkg7) (fig 1c) (2) correlations with gene signatures derived from purified cell populations deposited by encode31 (fig 1d) and (3) assignments of t-cell clonotypes based on the tcr sequencing.based on these approaches we annotated clusters as monocytes (clusters 0 5 11 12 and 16) cd4+ t cells (clusters 4 6 10 13 15 and 20) cd8+ t cells (clusters 1 8 9 and 17) nk cells (clusters 3 and 7) b cells (cluster 2) macrophages (cluster 14) and dendritic cells (dc clusters 18 and 19) (fig 1e).we also examined the relative proportion of cell types comprising the sequencing runs by tissue type (fig 1e).we observed a decrease of cd4+ t cells and b cells within normal kidneys or tumors relative to peripheral blood (fig 1e).con- versely and as expected we also found an increase of cd8+ t cells and macrophages in tumors relative to peripheral bloods (fig 1e).with the previous observation of an overall increase in macrophages and decreased monocytes in the inte- grated umap (fig 1e) we next focused on differential analyses of the myeloid populations (fig 5a).although similar in distribution along the umap which preserves global structure of expression these five clusters had distinct expression patterns (fig 1e 5e).in a comprehensive study t cells represented the dominant lymphocytic population in most ccrcc cases and b cells were rarely detected23 consistent with our findings of increased cd4+ and cd8+ t cells (fig 1).integration across the samples for subclustered populations is available in supplementary fig 1.]
Patterns of correlation between immune cell phenotypes in different tissues, identified by gene expression and cell lineage markers.

Text 565
10.3390/biom11020177
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 2. comparison between be2c and kelly datasets and with bulk rna-seq. (a) gene-by-gene comparison of log10 tpm average expression in be2c (x-axis) and kelly cells (y-axis). a linear regression line is shown, and the scc is indicated with the correlation p-value (precision limit: 10-302). (b) gene-by-gene comparison of log10 tpm variance of expression (after regressing out average expression with a loess regression) in be2c cells (x-axis) and kelly cells (y-axis). (c,d) gene-by-gene comparison between single-cell dataset expression (x-axis, shown as log10 sum of tpms) and bulk expression (y-axis, as log10 tpm expression of the cell line in the harenza dataset [24]). the spearman correlation coefficient (cc) is indicated. (e) tsne visualization (calculated on tpm data) including the entire harenza bulk rna-seq dataset [24] and the sum of tpms of single-cell datasets. mycn-amplified nbl cell lines are depicted as squares, not-mycn-amplified cell lines as circles. (f) heatmap reporting spearman correlation coefficient between single-cell aggregated tpm data and 20 bulk rna-seq samples from the harenza dataset. samples are ordered by correlation coefficient with the sckelly sample, and reported in two rows for graphical convenience.']. Reference sentences:[the variance shown in figure 2b is the residual variance after subtracting the expression levels using a loess regression (otherwise the expression variance would always be highly correlated to average expression).biomolecules 2021 11 177 5 of 18 figure 2.the expression level of metallothionein genes has been correlated with intracellular levels of metal ions (e.g. mt1x for copper [46]) and their expression variance represents the most notable difference when compared between be2c and kelly cells (figure 2ab).the two cell lines possess highly similar expression profiles (spearman correlation coefficient scc = 0.883) in terms of average expression with genes such as gapdh actb and mycn highly expressed in both with very low expression of myc and mycl (figure 2a).the two cell lines are highly similar when comparing gene expression variances (figure 2b scc = 0.781) where metallothionein genes are the ones most characterizing the divergence between the two with a much higher variance in kelly cells.we summed the gene tpms across all single cells and correlated these values with tpms from bulk rna-seq (figure 2c for scbe2c vs. bulk be2c and figure 2d for sckelly vs. bulk kelly).a tsne vi- sualization of all the bulk rna-seq from the harenza nbl cell lines dataset shows that the profile most similar to sckelly is bulk kelly cells (figure 2e).on the other hand our be2c single-cell dataset is most correlated with both be2c and be2 (sk-n-be-2 from which be2c derive) according to both tsne visualization (figure 2e) and whole-transcriptome expression spearman correlation coefficient analysis (figure 2f).]
Patterns related to gene expression correlation between single-cell datasets and bulk RNA-seq data are shown in the figure.

Text 566
10.1016/j.cell.2021.01.010
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 7. factors correlated with the tim composition (a) heatmap showing the coefficients of genes with somatic mutations significantly associated with the fractions of myeloid subset. lasso regression. (b) boxplot showing the comparison of lamp3+ cdcs fraction between cancer patients with or without mutations in muc4. unpaired two-sided wilcoxon test. (c) heatmap showing the coefficients of pathways with somatic mutations significantly associated with the fractions of myeloid subset. lasso regression. (d) boxplot showing the comparison of lamp3+ cdcs fraction between cancer patients with or without mutations in apoptosis and inﬂammatory response pathways. unpaired two-sided wilcoxon test. (e) scatterplot showing the correlation between pycr1 expression and spp1+ tams proportion in thca. spearman correlation. (f) boxplot showing the expression of pycr1 in non-cancer and tumor tissues in thca. unpaired two-sided wilcoxon test. the fraction was calculated by dividing the total myeloid cell number. see also table s6.']. Reference sentences:[ll open access 804 cell 184 792–809 february 4 2021 resource explored the relationship between tim compositions and so- matic mutation profiles in our pan-cancer collection (star methods) and identified several genes with somatic mutations correlated with myeloid cell subset proportions (figure 7a).of note we identified a negative association between the propor- tion of lamp3+ cdcs and mutations in muc4 (figure 7b) a gene known to be associated with tumor progression via modu- lating tumor cell apoptosis (carraway et al. 2009).notably the pycr1 gene expression in thca was positively correlated with the proportion of spp1+ macrophages (figure 7e).pycr1 encoding an enzyme involved in the biosynthesis of proline was upregulated in tumor tissues (figure 7f) but was not detected in any cd45+ immune cells from thca (data not shown).particularly in agree- ment with a recent study that elucidated the dual functions of cdc1-derived lamp3+ cdcs on tregs and cd8+ t cells (maier et al. 2020) we also confirmed the complex co-expression f e d a b c figure 7.]
Patterns related to correlation between gene mutations and cell subset proportions, as well as gene expression and cell proportions in cancer tissues.

Text 567
10.1016/j.isci.2021.102147
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure s3 head to head comparison of detection of 20 targets using linear vs targeted approach, related to figure 1. a) duplication rate analysis at matched sequencing depth. umi and counts were compared between constellation-seq and pcr. the slope was 7.6 and 33.5 for linear ampli cation and pcr respectively, showing that linear ampli cation was 4.4 times more sensitive. b) comparative sensitivity analysis between constellation-seq and targeted pcr. correlation of the umi captured in both techniques at matched sequencing depth. 15/17 genes above the x=y diagonal demonstrates the increased sensitivity of linear ampli cation. c) constellation-seq counts per bead are 2.7-fold higher than with dropseq. d-e) drop-out rate vs mean expression levels in targeted pcr and constellation-seq. red dots represent genes included in the library. f) comparison of the umis captured in dropseq vs constellation-seq.']. Reference sentences:[]
Summary: Correlation patterns between linear amplification and targeted PCR techniques show increased sensitivity in single-cell transcriptomics.

Text 568
10.1038/s41593-020-00787-0
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 5 | spatial registration of snrna-seq data. a–c, overview of the spatial registration approach. heatmap of pearson’s correlation values evaluates the relationship between our derived layer-enriched statistics (y axis) for 700 genes (a), layer-enriched statistics from snrna-seq data in human medial temporal cortex produced by hodge et al.5 (b; these data only profiled layers 1–6 in the gray matter, x axis) and cell-type-specific statistics for cellular subtypes that were annotated by mathys et al. from snrna-seq data in the human pfc10 (c; x axis). ast, astrocyte; end, endothelial; ex, excitatory neurons; in, inhibitory neurons; mic, microglia; oli, oligodendrocyte; opc, oligodendrocyte precursor cell; per, pericyte. see also supplementary figs. 8 and 9 and extended data fig 8.']. Reference sentences:[we first generated aggregated layer-enriched expression profiles for each spatial replicate using a ‘supervised’ approach to assign individual spots to each of the six neocortical layers or the wm (supplementary fig 5).see also supplementary fig 5 extended data fig 2 and 4 and supplementary table 4.specifically layer-enriched expression pro- files and de statistics derived from the ‘enrichment model’ in our visium data can be used to spatially ‘register’ snrna-seq datasets and add layer-enriched information to data-driven expression clus- ters that do not contain inherent anatomical information (fig 5a).although the snrna-seq data in that study were obtained predominantly from neun+-sorted neuronal nuclei that were isolated from manually dissected layers of the human postmor- tem middle temporal gyrus cortex our layer-enriched degs from spatially barcoded bulk tissue sections were in agreement with the laminar assignments from which these nuclei were derived (fig 5b).glial cell subpopulations showed expected enrichments with preferential expression of oligodendrocyte sub- types in the wm astrocyte subtypes in l1 and microglia oligo- dendrocyte precursor pericytes and endothelial subtypes in both l1 and wm (fig 5c).neuronal cell subtypes showed greater laminar diversity with multiple excitatory and inhibitory neuronal cell types associating with l2/l3 l4 l5 and l6 preferential expression with generally more layer-enriched expression within excitatory cells (fig 5c).likewise many genes showed no laminar patterning (extended data fig 5).this resulted in 47329 genes quantified across 76 layer-sample combinations (7 × 12 = 84 because not all layers were clearly observed in each sample as br5595 had no distinct l1 or l2 across all 4 spatial replicates; supplementary fig 5).dendrogram from the hierarchical clustering performed across all 76 layer-level combinations: 6 layers plus wm across 12 samples with two layers visually absent in one sample as shown in supplementary fig 5 second row.]
Patterns of correlation between layer-enriched statistics from different datasets and cell-type-specific statistics in single-cell data.

Text 569
10.1002/advs.202004320
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 3. telomere length and its significance in cscs and epcs of crc tumors. a) histograms displaying single-cell telomere length. relative telomere length shown as t/r ratio was measured by qpcr after preamplification step that simultaneously amplifies both telomere repeats (t) and a reference gene (r). each histogram represents an individual cell. cells were grouped and color-coded by distinct subcell types. b) boxplot showing distribution of telomere length in subpopulations of crcs. each box shows the median and interquartile range (iqr 25th–75th percentiles), and whiskers indicate the highest and lowest value within 1.5 times the iqr. c) distribution of stemness score in csc cluster and epc subclusters. d) mean telomere length in csc cluster and epc subclusters. e) distribution of predicted telomerase signature in csc cluster and epc sub-clusters. mean ± sem, p-values based on one-way anova. f) scatter plot illustrating predicted telomerase signature and stemness score in cscs, epcs, and all single cells. a linear regression line is also shown. g) correlation among stemness score, predicted telomerase signature and telomere length. a linear regression line was shown. shading represents the 95% confidence interval for regression line. h) heatmap displaying expression pattern of telomere-related genes in epcs and cscs. two lists of telomere-related genes were from “go_telomere_maintenance_via_telomerase” and “go_telomere_maintenance_via_recombination” in gsea .']. Reference sentences:[a total of 242 cells passed the rna-seq and telomere length qc concurrently (figure 3a see the experi- mental section).relative telomere length shown as t/r ratio in crc tumors at the single-cell level varied considerably ranging from 0.83 to 3.33 (figure 3a).of the subpopulations edcs and cafs had the longest telomeres on average whereas dendritic cells (dcs) displayed the shortest mean telomeres (figure 3b).surprisingly cscs contained shorter telomeres compared with most of other cell types (figure 3b).the stemness score significance of epcs_b resembled more closely cscs than did epcs_a and epcs_b diﬀered from epcs_a (p = 0.0309) (figure 3c) again suggesting that epcs_b may arise from cscs.intriguingly both epcs_b and epcs_a cell types had longer telomeres than did cscs (figure 3d).epcs exhibited a higher “telomerase score” than did other subpopulations and epcs_b cells expressed higher telomerase activity than did epcs_a and csc cells (figure 3e).the stemness score of cscs was dissoci- ated with telomerase activity (figure 3f p = 0.0950) while the stemness score was significantly correlated with telomerase ac- tivity in epcs (figure 3f p = 0.0006).when all cells were pooled the stemness score significantly correlated with telomerase activ- ity (figure 3f p < 0.0001).yet telomere length did not correlate with stemness score (figure 3g p = 0.9247) nor with telomerase activity in the pooled cells (figure 3g p = 0.6697) likely due to the extreme heterogeneity of crc tumors and rare cscs in the population.genes related to telomerase and telomere recombination (a term with gene list from gsea) were highly enriched in epcs_b cells (figure 3h).the components of telomerase complex dkc1 and nop10 telomere shelterin complex terf1/trf1 and re- combination related genes such as pold2 rad51 rad50 fen1 smc5 and smc6 were highly expressed in epcs_b cells (figure 3h).the stemness score was significantly correlated with telomerase activity in epcs on sin- gle cell level (figure 3f) but not in cscs.]
Patterns related to telomere length, stemness score, and telomerase activity in different cell subpopulations of CRC tumors were analyzed.

Text 570
10.1016/j.cell.2021.02.018
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure s4. supporting data for dissecting primary gene expression signature correlates inferred by conditional independence network analysis, related to figure 4 (a) scatterplot of reactome_oxidative stress-induced senescence signature score and go_apoptotic signaling signature score in pdcs (pearson correlation and p value were computed using pairwise complete observations [samples filtered to those with at least 8 cells and 40,000 umi detected in the pseudobulk library]). each dot denotes a subject and is colored by the severity-outcome category. (b) similar to (a), but between circulating il-15 level and fatty acid metabolism signature score in cd56dimcd16hi nk cells after regressing out their associations with dsm. (c and d) similar to figure 4d. heatmaps of reactome_fatty acid metabolism in nk cells of two validation cohorts (schulte-schrepping et al., 2020) cohort 1 (c) and cohort 2 (d). the le genes from the gsea analysis of association with dsm in each cohort are shown. only the first time point (t0 sample) of each subject is shown. (e) gsea results of schulte-schrepping et al. (2020) cohorts for nk cell reactome_fatty acid metabolism. (f) similar to figure 4g. scatterplot of reactome_fatty acid metabolism score and hallmark_tnfa signaling via nf-kb score in the validation cohorts (schulte-schrepping et al., 2020). (g and h) similar to figure 4e. heatmaps of inﬂammation related gene sets in classical monocytes: hallmark_tnfa signaling via nf-kb (g) and hallmark_inﬂammatory response (h).']. Reference sentences:[]
Patterns of correlation between different gene expression signatures in various cell types are shown, focusing on specific relationships between gene sets.

Text 571
10.1016/j.cell.2021.02.018
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 4. conditional independence network analysis points to il-15-associated fatty acid metabolism and attenuated inﬂammation in cd56dimcd16hi nk cells as primary correlates of disease severity (a) disease severity network showing cell-type-specific gene set signatures directly connected with dsm (see star methods). direct connections between the nodes to each other are also shown in a lighter shade. edge value and width indicate spearman correlation and its statistical significance, respectively, between dsm and the gene set signature score. in the legend: % leading-edge (le) genes denotes the proportion of genes from the gene set that are in the le based on']. Reference sentences:[we found four nodes directly connected to dsm (figure 4a; the rest of the network is captured in table s5).oxidative stress-induced senescence in pdcs and fatty acid (fa) meta- bolism in cd56dimcd16hi nk cells were inferred as the primary positive correlates of dsm (figure 4a; tables s4b and s5).ll cell 184 1836–1857 april 1 2021 1843 article a b g i c d e f h j l k figure 4.strikingly circulating levels of il-15 were indeed positively correlated with the fa signature score in these nk cells (figure 4b) and this association was dsm dependent: il-15 was itself correlated with dsm (figure 4c) and il-15 and the fa signature were no longer correlated once their associations with dsm were statistically removed (figure s4b).both fa biosynthetic and catabolic/oxidative genes were elevated in the most severe (e.g. the critical-deceased subjects) versus the less severe patients who tended to express these genes at lower levels than hcs (figure 4d).in contrast the inﬂammation signatures increased including the nf-kb (hallmark_tnfa_signaling_ via_nf-kb) and il-1 signatures (figure 4k; tables s4c and s4d) and the ifng transcript (data not shown).although we uncovered an exhaustion related meta- bolic gene signature in cd56dimcd16hi nk cells as a primary dis- ease severity correlate (figure 4a) cd8+ t cells did not show signs of exhaustion beyond the transcriptional signatures ex- pected of cellular activation or regulation by type i ifns (ivashkiv and donlin 2014) even in patients with critical disease.ll e9 cell 184 1836–1857.e1–e12 april 1 2021 article conditional independence network analysis a severity network (figure 4a) was created using a more expansive collection of annotated gene sets (similar to figures 3a and 3b) with false discovery rate (fdr) % 0.2 in the dsm gene set enrichment analysis (table s4b) to infer ‘‘direct’’ correlations (see below) among biological processes in different cell subsets and their association with disease severity.supporting data for dissecting primary gene expression signature correlates inferred by conditional independence network analysis related to figure 4 (a) scatterplot of reactome_oxidative stress-induced senescence signature score and go_apoptotic signaling signature score in pdcs (pearson correlation and p value were computed using pairwise complete observations [samples filtered to those with at least 8 cells and 40000 umi detected in the pseudobulk library]).(c and d) similar to figure 4d.(f) similar to figure 4g.(g and h) similar to figure 4e.exogeneous corticosteroid treatment is not a major driver of cell-type-specific gene expression signatures associated with disease severity related to figure 4 (a) gsea results for glucocorticoid response signature (see star methods on how the signature was derived) in dsm association model.]
Summary: Correlation patterns between gene sets and disease severity in different cell types, highlighting fatty acid metabolism and inflammation as primary correlates.

Text 572
10.1038/s41592-021-01060-3
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 5 | correlative analysis of chromatin state and gene expression links distal candidate cis-regulatory elements to putative target genes. a, schematics for identifying potential targets for ccres. putative ccre–gene pairs were first determined by calculating the co-occupancy of h3k4me1 reads in gene promoter and distal ccre regions. the spearman correlation coefficients (sccs) between expression levels of genes and h3k27ac or h3k27me3 levels of ccres were then used to identify ccre–gene pairs. b, density plot showing the distribution of correlations between histone modification levels of ccres and expression of potential target genes. the cutoffs (fdr=0 .05) for identifying potential h3k27ac-associated active and h3k27me3-associated inactive ccre–gene pairs are also indicated. c, representative genome browser view of olig1 and olig2 gene locus; both h3k27ac- and h3k27me3-associated ccres are shown. tss-proximal regions are marked with green boxes and ccres are indicated with blue (h3k27ac-specific), brown (h3k27me3-specific) or purple (shared) boxes. d, venn diagram showing the overlap between predicted h3k27ac- and h3k27me3-associated ccre–gene pairs. p value, two-tailed fisher’s exact test. e, relative enrichment of the distribution in cre groups of fig 4 for ccres in h3k27ac-specific, shared and h3k27me3-specific pairs. f, heatmap showing the enrichments of predicted targeted genes of each promoter group defined in fig 3a linked by ccres of each cre group defined in fig 4. g, sccs between read densities of ccres and promoters of putative target genes across cell types for h3k27ac and h3k27me3. p value, two-tailed wilcoxon signed-rank test. the boxes were drawn from lower quartile (q1) to upper quartile (q3) with the middle line denoting the median, and whiskers with maximum 1.5 iqr. n=22 cell types. h, heatmap showing the histone modification levels at ccres with potential active roles in expression of putative target genes. ccres were grouped using k-means clustering based on histone modification levels. i, heatmap showing the expression levels of corresponding putative target genes of ccres in h. j, top enriched go terms for genes in i and the top enriched de novo motifs for ccres from each group in h. ns, not significant.']. Reference sentences:[using k-means clustering we categorized these gene promoters into seven groups with distinct combinations of histone modification: class i promoters were associated with the hetero- chromatin mark h3k9me3 (13.1% of all tested genes) class ii-a and ii-b groups were associated with the polycomb repressive histone mark h3k27me3 (9.2% of all tested genes) and the remaining four groups of promoters were associated with variable levels of active histone marks h3k4me1 and h3k27ac (77.6% of all tested genes) (fig 3a–c extended data fig 5a–c and supplementary table 4).our data suggest that olfactory receptor genes are silenced by simi- lar mechanisms in the frontal cortex and hippocampus (extended data fig 5d).we also carried out pseudotime analysis on ogc lineages based on the transcriptome profile and assigned the promoter chromatin states to the differentially expressed genes (fig 3e extended data fig 5gh and methods).we then calculated the pairwise spearman’s correlation coefficients (sccs) between the gene expression levels of the putative target genes and the histone mark levels of the ccres across cell clusters (fig 5a and methods).we identified 32252 ccre–gene pairs where h3k27ac levels at the distal ccres positively correlated with gene expression and 15199 ccre–gene pairs where h3k27me3 levels at the ccres negatively correlated with expression of linked genes (false discovery rate (fdr) < 0.05; fig 5bc extended data fig 7a– f supplementary table 9 and methods).interestingly a significant fraction of h3k27ac-associated ccre–gene pairs were in common with the h3k27me3-associated ccre–gene pairs (p < 2.2 × 10−16 2621 observed compared with 185 randomly expected) (fig 5d and supplementary table 9).the ccres in these shared pairs tended to be in the eii-b group (fig 5e) and to target genes that were enriched for development processes such as gliogenesis and forebrain devel- opment (extended data fig 7g).interestingly promoters of target genes tended to be in similar groups with ccres: for example target genes of class eii-a and eii-b ccres were strongly enriched in promoters of class ii-a and ii-b genes (fig 5f).these genes are enriched in those with functions in development processes (fig 3c and extended data fig 5f).we then compared the chromatin state of ccres with the promoters of the putative target genes: ccres and promoters from the active pairs displayed higher concordance for their h3k27ac levels but not for the inactive pairs; on the other hand higher concordance for h3k27me3 levels was only observed from the inactive pairs (fig 5g and extended data fig 7k).we then grouped the ccres with linked genes according to their h3k27 acetylation and methylation states (fig 5hi extended data fig 7lm and supplementary table 10).]
Patterns related to correlation between histone modification levels of distal candidate cis-regulatory elements (ccres) and gene expression levels across cell types were analyzed.

Text 573
10.1038/s41467-021-21421-y
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 1 human cancer cells display differential engraftment profiles in zebrafish. a engraftment is the ratio between the number of zebrafish xenografts that maintain a tumor at 4 days post injection (dpi) and the number of total xenografts that were originally successful injected and survived until day 4. mda-mb-231 (mda-231), mda-mb-468 (mda-468), and hs578t are breast cancer cell lines. sw480, sw48, ht29, sw620, hct116, and hke3 are colorectal (crc) cancer cell lines. tumor cells were labeled and injected into the perivitelline space (pvs) of 2 days post-fertilization (dpf) zebrafish embryos. each dot represents one independent experiment, number of independent experiments: 19 sw480, 3 sw48, 5 mda-231 12 mda-468, 5 ht29, 7 hs578t, 22 sw620, 6 hct116, 7 hke3. total number of xenografts analyzed (n) is depicted in the charts. error bars indicate mean ± s.d. b engraftment of sw480 and zebrafish patient-derived xenografts (zpdx-zavatars) at 4 dpi, treated with folfox (fo) and radiotherapy (rad) and their respective controls. each dot represents one independent experiment (3 sw480, 1 zpdx). total number of xenografts analyzed (n) is depicted in the charts. error bars indicate mean ± s.d. see also supplementary fig 1. c–f comparative transcriptomic analysis between sw480 and sw620 xenografts. c schematic representation of the experiment where sw480 (in red) and sw620 (in green) tumors were dissected at 2 dpi for rna extraction (~30 tumors of each condition). d heatmap presents a two-dimensional dendogram (based on pearson’s correlation coefficient distance) of log2 counts-per-million (logcpm), normalized expression values of differentially expressed genes (n = 459, cut-off of fdr < 0.05 and absolute log2fc > 1) in sw480 (low engraftment) versus sw620 (high engraftment) comparison, where colors represent expression values scaled by row (z-scores). e, f gsea of sw480 and sw620 xenografts. source data are provided as a source data file.']. Reference sentences:[of note we describe engraftment as the frequency of xenografts that present a tumor (at least 30 tumor cells) at 4 dpi (fig 1a) and clearance as engraftment inhibition.we define here these tumors as pro- gressors and regressors respectively following schreiber nomenclature16 (fig 1a).while sw480 cells derived from the primary tumor present a regressor behavior sw620 cells isolated from a lymph node metastasis 6 months later1718 show a progressor phenotype (fig 1a).this is exemplified by the breast cancer cells hs578t_progressors which display a high engraftment rate (~95% engraftment) despite their low proliferation and high level of apoptosis in comparison for instance with breast cancer mda-mb-468 which display lower engraftment but are more proliferative and less apoptotic (supplementary fig 1a–d).also although sw620_progressors are highly proliferative compared with sw480_regressors sw620_progressors present higher levels of apoptosis (supplemen- tary fig 1e–h).moreover paradoxically we observed that sw480_regressors upon chemo- (folfox-fo) or radiotherapy (rad) may increase their engraftment rate and this can also be observed in patient-derived xenografts (zavatars) (fig 1b).a pool of ~30 tumors from at least three independent experiments was collected for rna extraction (fig 1c).a differential expression analysis revealed 459 differentially expressed genes (degs) between the two types of xenografts (fig 1d supplementary data 1).whereas genes involved in epithelial to mesenchymal transition (emt) were specifically enriched in sw480 xenografts genes involved in proliferation and hypoxia/angiogenesis were specifi- cally represented in sw620 tumors (fig 1e f).in contrast sw620 degs were characterized by an enrichment in ifn and tnf signaling ros and notch pathways (jagged1 maml2) but not in graft-versus-host disease or allograft rejection pathways (fig 1e f).as expected we could identify enrichment of wnt and notch pathways (supplementary fig 10) as these are major players in the maintenance of the stem cell state and the regulation of differentiation of transit-amplifying (ta) progenitors41.wnt signaling seemed to be highly active in cluster 3 as highlighted by the higher expression of various pathway components (notum apcdd1 and axin2 see supplementary fig 10a and fig 8e).in contrast notch activation was uniquely predominant in cluster 1 as evidenced by the high expression of hes1 hes5 and hey2/l genes (supplementary fig 10b) which are canonical downstream targets and effectors of the pathway42.indeed we observed that expression of ascl-2 tff3 and prox14344 were highly enriched in cluster 3 (supplementary fig 10c d).interestingly the expanded cluster 5 seemed to have an enrichment in tert and dll4 suggesting that this cluster may represent the quiescent-like progenitor pool known as +445 (fig 8e supplementary fig 10c d).source data from fig 1–7 and supplementary figure 7 are provided as a source data file.]
Summary: Patterns of gene expression correlation between low and high engraftment xenografts in single-cell transcriptomics.

Text 574
10.1038/s41586-021-03232-9
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 2 | proteogenomic dissection of cell-cycle-related variations. a, overall variance (gini index) and variance explained by cell cycle progression for each investigated protein. b, subcellular localizations of ccd and non-ccd proteins (enriched relative to hpa-mapped proteome, p < 0.01; exact p values in extended data fig 6h). c, dimensionality reduction of scrna-seq data using umap for ccd genes shows a cycle correlated with cell division. rna velocity moments (arrows) confirm the directionality of cycling. d, relative expression of ccd transcripts (left) and ccd proteins (right) over interphase (x-axes).']. Reference sentences:[identifying cell-cycle-regulated proteins we found that the variations in expression level for more than 300 proteins were temporally correlated with interphase progression (27% 320 of 1180; fig 2a supplementary table 2).proteins with ccd and non-ccd variability in expression differed in localization from other proteins mapped in the hpa (fig 2b).cell cycling can clearly be seen in the uniform manifold approximation and projection (umap) and rna velocity streams that reflect interphase progression (fig 2c extended data fig 7a b supple- mentary table 6).temporal delay between rna and protein to study the temporal dynamics of the cell cycle transcriptome and proteome we compared the times of peak rna and protein expression (fig 2d).we observed an 8.6-h delay on aver- age between the peaks of rna and protein expression for the 73 ccd proteins with cycling transcripts (fig 2e).cycling proteins also have distinct physical and structural char- acteristics as broadly indicated by their lower thermodynamic stabilities (p = 2.2 × 10−4; fig 2f supplementary tables 10 11).these results can be viewed for all genes in the scatter plots of percent variance and gini index in fig 2a for protein and extended data fig 8a for rna.temporal delay between peak protein and rna expression to study the temporal dynamics of the cell cycle transcriptome and proteome we sorted rnas and proteins (fig 2d) on the basis of their time of peak expression.the absolute timing of cell cycle periodicity may vary between cells and so the temporal delays (fig 2e) were calcu- lated as fractions of the cell cycle and multiplied by 25.3 h the estimated length of the cell cycle in u2os fucci cells (g1 10.8 h; s-transition 2.6 h; s and g2 11.9 h) to get the approximate length of temporal delays between peak protein and rna expression.article extended data fig 2 | see next page for caption.extended data fig 2 | time-lapses of cell cycle regulated proteins.the rna velocities calculated for these cells (fig 2c extended data fig 7a b) validate this sorting strategy as a cell cycle reflecting interphase progression is clearly observed.the g2 group includes known proteins such as pc (fig 3) ccnb1 aurkb (extended data fig 2c d) and bub1b.]
Patterns of correlation between cell cycle progression and gene expression levels, with distinct characteristics and temporal delays.

Text 575
10.1038/s41588-021-00778-2
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 1 | cite-seq and eccite-seq identify regulators of pd-l1 protein expression. a, experimental design schematic. expression of pd-l1 (left) and cd86 (right) proteins in stimulated (stim) (green, n=20,000 cells) and control (unstim, unstimulated) (gray, n=20,000 cells) thp-1 cells, as measured by flow cytometry (b) and cite-seq (c). d, single-cell heatmap showing the z-scored expression of 200 genes, the expression of which correlated with cd86 and pd-l1 protein expression (supplementary data). e, eccite-seq measurements of pd-l1 protein expression in cells that received grna targeting pd-l1 and ifngr1 and nt controls. f, power analysis to estimate the number of cells necessary to detect statistically significant shifts in protein expression across two different grnas (ifngr1g2 and pdl1g1). a one-sided wilcoxon rank-sum test was used. each boxplot summarizes ten random sampling draws of the indicated number of cells and the log-transformed p values generated by de analysis of proteins using the wilcoxon rank-sum test. de analysis was performed using the same number of sampled cells expressing ifngr2g1, pdl1g1 and the nt control. for boxplots, the middle line is the median, the lower and upper hinges correspond to the first and third quartiles, the upper whisker extends from the hinge to the largest value no further than 1.5×iqr from the hinge (iqr, interquartile range), and the lower whisker extends from the hinge to the smallest value, at most 1.5×iqr of the hinge.']. Reference sentences:[aiming to develop an experimental system to study multiple immune checkpoints simultaneously we screened four cancer cell lines (thp-1 k562 kg-1 and u937 supplementary fig 1 and 2) and tested their ability to upregulate immune checkpoint mol- ecules in response to cytokines by flow cytometry (supplementary data).we found that stimulating thp-1 cells with a combination of ifn-γ decitabine (dac) and transforming growth factor (tgf)-β1 resulted in robust induction of three immune checkpoints: pd-l1 pd-l2 and cd86 (supplementary fig 1a).to identify and characterize new regulators we pursued a two-step experimental strategy (fig 1a).for each surface protein we compared the patterns of upreg- ulation upon stimulation observed by cite-seq with those observed by flow cytometry and found highly concordant results across tech- nologies (fig 1bc and supplementary fig 1ab).induced genes included well-characterized members of the ifn-γ pathway (jak2 stat1 and irf1) while downregulated genes (elane ms4a6a and ctsg) were consistent with the monocyte progenitor identity of resting thp-1 cells (fig 1d).in both cases we observed a substantial reduction in pd-l1 expression (fig 1e) and perturbation of ifngr1 also ablated the ifn-γ tran- scriptional response.clear effects were observed even after downs- ampling the dataset to 25 cells per grna (fig 1f).while we had expected that cells would form groupings that were consistent with their underlying genetic perturbation we initially observed that alternative sources of variation includ- ing transduction replicate identity cell cycle stage and the activation of cellular stress responses (extended data fig 1ab) confounded our analysis.these sources of heterogeneity were also present in an independent analysis of control cells (those expressing nt grna species extended data fig 1c) and we therefore designed a proce- dure to mitigate their effects.mixscape robustly filters cells that do not exhibit transcriptomic evidence of perturbation and substantially increases the signal-to-noise ratio in downstream analyses (extended data fig 10).these genes are shown in fig 1d in which cells in both the protein and rna heatmaps are ordered based on their pc1 embedding values.concordant cells were used for plotting pd-l1 expression in fig 1e.supplementary figure 1c summarizes our findings.gating strategy before analysis of fluorescence alive single cells were isolated via sequential gating on ssc-a vs. fsc-a fsc-h vs fsc-a and fsc-h vs dapi according to standard flow cytometry practices (supplemtary figure 1a).]
Patterns related to correlation between gene expression and protein expression of immune checkpoints in stimulated vs. control cells were identified.

Text 576
10.1038/s41588-021-00779-1
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 4 | perturb-cite-seq reveals cofunctional modules that are dependent or independent of a predominant ifn-γ–jak/stat mechanism. a, overview of computational approach (methods). b, perturbations in the jak/stat pathway affect both known and putative mechanisms of immune evasion. regulatory effect (β values) on rna and protein features (rows) following perturbation of different genes in the jak/stat pathway (columns). c,d, cofunctional modules and coregulated programs in the perturb-cite-seq screen. c, middle heatmap: signed significance (= log10ðempirical pþ ´ signðβþ, red/blue color bar) for the effect on each rna/protein feature (rows) of perturbation of each gene (columns, excluding jaki /stat targets) in the co-culture condition. right and bottom matrices: pearson correlation coefficient (purple/green color bar) between the significance profiles of either gene/protein features (right matrix) or perturbed genes (bottom matrix). cofunctional modules (bottom bar) and coregulated programs (right bar) are identified by separate k-means clustering of the bottom and right matrices (k=4 and 8, respectively), and clustering defines the row and column order. d, representation of regulatory connections between selected modules (left) and programs (right) from c. bold font denotes selected regulators that are also members of programs; boxed text denotes selected regulators significantly enriched/depleted in the viability screen (fig 2d,e). notably, the edges in d are opposite the sign of the empirical pvalue in c: a target module connected to a coregulated program with negative signed pvalues in c activates the corresponding program in d. e,f, the icr program is coherently regulated by the perturbed regulators. e, regulatory effect (β values) on rna/protein features from the icr program (rows, icr as defined in ref. 9) by perturbations of different genes in the screen (columns), clustered by k-means (k=2). f, change in icr signature scores and their associated significance (yaxis, –log10(p), welch’s t-test) for each perturbation (dot) in the ifn-γ condition (methods). key perturbations with significant effects are noted.']. Reference sentences:[across all perturb-cite-seq screens we analyzed 218331 high-quality scrna and protein profiles spanning the co-culture (73114 cells) ifn-γ (87590 cells) and control (57627 cells) conditions (fig 3ae and extended data fig 4a–d; methods).we removed 805 contami- nating t cells using unsupervised clustering (extended data fig 4ab; methods).within each condition both the cell cycle (g1/0 s g2/m) (fig 3f) and com- plexity (extended data fig 4c) impacted rna profiles revealing important covariates addressed in subsequent analyses (extended data fig 4d–h).we developed a computational framework to model the effects of genetic perturbations on both rna and protein profiles of indi- vidual genes (fig 4a; methods).following our previous studies1 we included both cell cycle and cell complexity (number of umis) as known covari- ates that impact cell profiles (fig 3f and extended data fig 4c).the perturb-cite-seq model correctly reconstructed the impact of genes known to affect resistance to immunotherapy in particular the effect of perturbing the ifn-γ response machinery (fig 4b) along with new pathways.those genes are also often members of regulated programs (fig 4d).perturbation of any major known node of this pathway downregulated a coherent regu- latory program in co-culture (fig 4b).these include serpine2 and tgfb2 cd9 protein cd59 protein and both cd58 transcript and cd58 protein (fig 4b).to focus on other distinct cofunctional modules we examined the regulation matrix after exclusion of perturbations in ifn-γ– jak/stat pathway genes (fig 4c) and recovered new regulators and mechanisms of immune evasion either related to or distinct from the impact of the ifn-γ–jak/stat pathway (fig 4cd supplementary table 6 and supplementary note).the perturbations also altered the expression of the icr pro- gram that we originally defined in patients1 in both co-culture (fig 4e) and in response to ifn-γ treatment (fig 4f).perturbations of the ifn-γ–jak/stat module strongly increased the overall expression of the icr signature (jak1 p = 1.3 × 10–10; ifngr2 p = 1.4 × 10–8; ifngr1 p = 3.3 × 10–5; stat1 p = 9.6 × 10–5; statistics derived by welch’s t-test methods) as did deletion of tmem173 encoding sting (stimulator of interferon genes) which acti- vates a type i interferon response25 (fig 4e).in contrast other perturbations including ko of cdk6 myc ilf2 dnmt1 or acsl3 repressed the icr signature (fig 4f) consis- tent with our previously reported patient and preclinical data where we demonstrated that upregulation of myc and cdk4/6 (and their transcriptional targets) was associated with increased resistance to immunotherapy and that cdk4/6 inhibitors reduced resistance in human and preclinical melanoma models9.importantly cd58 is not activated by the ifn-γ–jak/ stat pathway (fig 4b) and cd58 ko conferred a different molec- ular phenotype than ifn-γ–jak/stat pathway perturbations belonged to a distinct module and did not impact the expression of antigen-presentation genes (fig 5a).indeed defects in the ifn-γ–jak/stat nodes led to increased cd58 rna and protein expression (fig 4b and 5h) and stimulation with ifn-γ (at either 1 or 10 ng ml–1) did not increase protein abundance of cd58 (extended data fig 7g–j and fig 3b) suggesting that cd58 is not induced via the ifn-γ pathway.notably the cd58–cd2 axis is a potent costimulatory pathway in cd8+ t cells that lack expression of cd28 (cd8+cd28– t cells)29 which are common in the tumor microen- vironment and peripheral blood of patients with solid tumors30 and were the predominant t cells in our perturb-cite-seq screen (extended data fig 4b).note that ifn-γ–jak/stat perturbations have been removed from fig 4c for visualization purposes only.]
Patterns related to correlation between regulatory connections and coregulated programs in single-cell transcriptomics data were analyzed, revealing distinct cofunctional modules and mechanisms of immune evasion.

Text 577
10.1038/s41588-021-00779-1
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 2 | identification of genes for evasion of til-mediated killing by crispr–cas9 viability screen in patient-derived models exposed to increasing immune pressures. a, identification of essential genes unrelated to immune pressure. change in abundance (negative log2 fold-change (lfc), yaxis) of each sgrna (dot) at day14 versus day7 following lentivirus transduction, with guides ranked (xaxis) by lfc value. pink: called essential genes (methods). b,c, high reproducibility of screen across triplicates. number of reads detected (x, yaxes) for each sgrna (dots) when comparing each pair within triplicate experiments (color legend) in either control cells (b) or ifn-γ-treated cells (c) on day17. pearson (r) correlation coefficients are noted in the legend. d,e, co-culture screen highlighting the role of the ifn-γ–jak/stat pathway and additional mechanisms. lfc (dot color) and significance (–log10(p) and dot size (and significantly enriched/depleted perturbations) encircled with black border) (methods) of sgrna gene perturbations (columns) that are differentially enriched in tumor cells co-cultured with different doses of tils (rows) on day17 compared to control cells (d) or ifn-γ-treated cells (e).']. Reference sentences:[we transduced patient-derived melanoma cells stably expressing active cas9 (extended data fig 2a) with the icr library at a multiplicity of infection of 0.1 to achieve a high rate of single-guide transductions with ~1000 cells per guide (extended data fig 2b–d) cultured the cells for 14 days and then co-cultured them with a range of til doses (1:1 2:1 or 4:1) treated them with ifn-γ (no co-culture) or maintained them in culture medium alone (control).to identify ‘essential’ genes independent of t-cell-mediated killing in this robust screen (extended data fig 3a–c) we identified sgrnas that were depleted by days 7 and 14 before any treatment or co-culture (fig 2a extended data fig 3b–d and supplementary table 2); these included expected candidates such as myc.the screens were highly reproducible across tripli- cate samples (fig 2bc and extended data fig 3bc) and co-culture showed dose-dependent lysis of cancer cells with 30.96 58.35 and 75.0% killing at ratios of 1:1 2:1 and 4:1 respectively (extended data fig 3a).as expected perturbations of b2m hla-a jak1 jak2 stat1 ifngr1 and ifngr2 (fig 2de extended data fig 3ef and supplementary table 2) conferred immune evasion con- sistent with clinical mechanisms of resistance to immunotherapy7–9.other enriched perturbations included cd47 cd58 and cdh19 (fig 2de).in particular levels of proteins cd58 cd47 and ifngr1 (cd119) were reduced in co-culture concordant with enrichment of their genetic ko in the viability screen (fig 2de and 3b).for example knockout or downregulation of cd58 is associated with immune evasion (fig 2de and 3d) and thus its upregulation following umap 1 umap 2 umap 1 umap 2 umap 1 umap 2 umap 1 umap 2 a e c b control ifn-γ co-culture control ifn-γ co-culture g1 g2m s control ifn-γ co-culture co-culture versus ifn-γ co-culture versus control ifn-γ versus control f g cd140a cd140b cd49f cd202b cd279 cd274 cd309 cd61 cd58 cd59 cd47 hla-e hla-a cd117 cd119 cd172a cd184 cd9 cd29 cd44 –1.0 –0.5 0 0.5 1.0 100 50 1 4 3 2 1 0 8 6 4 2 0 –2 expression cd58 0 1.0 0.5 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5 4.0 hla-abc protein condition program no.d representation of regulatory connections between selected modules (left) and programs (right) from c. bold font denotes selected regulators that are also members of programs; boxed text denotes selected regulators significantly enriched/depleted in the viability screen (fig 2de).]
Patterns related to correlation between gene perturbations and immune evasion mechanisms in single cells were identified through a CRISPR-Cas9 screen.

Text 578
10.1038/s41588-021-00801-6
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 5). none of the remaining clusters displayed such an enrichment (extended data fig 5b and supplementary table 6). to more directly assess the relevance of cluster 2 for neuronal differentiation efficiency, we tested for and confirmed an association between the fraction of cells in cluster 2 and neuronal differentiation efficiency for each cell line (pearson r=−0.76, p=2.05×10−9; fig 3f and extended data fig 5d). using the known relationship between ipsc bulk rna-seq values and the proportion of cluster 2 cells, we predicted this proportion for 182 cell lines included in our differentiation experiments, confirming the negative correlation with neuronal differentiation efficiency (pearson r=−0.49; p=3×10−12, extended data fig 5e and methods). finally, we analyzed an additional scrna-seq dataset from ipscs derived from lymphoblastoid cell lines38. using our single-cell analysis workflow, we identified a cluster of cells with an expression profile concordant with that of cluster 2 (methods and supplementary fig 6). in sum, these results suggest that a subpopulation of ipscs with poor neuronal differentiation capability is consistently detected across different human ipsc banks and that this bias can be robustly predicted using expression markers at the ipsc stage.']. Reference sentences:[we identi- fied five clusters with all but one (cluster 4) expressing high levels of core pluripotency markers (nanog sox2 pou5f1 extended data fig 5c and methods).cells from cluster 2 overexpressed genes associated with inefficient neuronal differentiation (for example utf1) and downregulated genes associated with efficient neuronal differentiation (for example tac3; fig 3de and extended data fig 5).to more directly assess the relevance of cluster 2 for neuronal differentia- tion efficiency we tested for and confirmed an association between the fraction of cells in cluster 2 and neuronal differentiation effi- ciency for each cell line (pearson r = −0.76 p = 2.05 × 10−9; fig 3f and extended data fig 5d).using the known relationship between ipsc bulk rna-seq values and the proportion of cluster 2 cells we predicted this proportion for 182 cell lines included in our differ- entiation experiments confirming the negative correlation with neuronal differentiation efficiency (pearson r = −0.49; p = 3 × 10−12 extended data fig 5e and methods).we identified 1284 eqtl in our study with evidence of colo- calization with at least one disease trait (fig 5ab).of these 597 were found only in our dataset corresponding to an additional >10% of colocalization events of gwas variants compared to those of eqtl across all gtex tissues (5028 across 48 tissues fig 5b).one notable colocalization event was an eqtl for sfxn5 a mitochondrial amino acid transporter47 that was specific to the rotenone-stimulated serotonergic neurons at day 52 and colocalized with a schizophrenia hit (pp4 = 0.78 fig 5c and supplementary fig 7).another example that colocalized with a schizophrenia gwas variant was an eqtl for fgfr1 detected both in proliferating and non-proliferating floor plate progenitors at day 11 (pp4 = 0.93 and 0.88 respectively fig 5d).for example the numbers of new disease–eqtl colocalizations added by gtex liver and cerebellar neuronal differentiation a b c d schizophrenia gwas schizophrenia gwas n gwas b o (this study) n (597) n–b (49) n–o (351) n–b–o (287) intelligence neuropsychiatric neurodegenerative behavior fpp d11 p_fpp d11 fpp d30 da d30 sert d30 epen1 d30 da d52 none sert d52 none epen1 d52 none astro d52 none da d52 rot sert d52 rot epen1 d52 rot astro d52 rot brain amygdala brain anterior cingulate cortex ba24 brain caudate basal ganglia brain cerebellar hemisphere brain cerebellum brain cortex brain frontal cortex ba9 brain hippocampus brain hypothalamus brain nucleus accumbens basal ganglia brain putamen basal ganglia brain spinal cord cervical c-1 brain substantia nigra adipose subcutaneous adipose visceral omentum adrenal gland artery aorta artery coronary artery tibial breast mammary tissue cells ebv-transformed lymphocytes cells transformed fibroblasts colon sigmoid colon transverse esophagus gastroesophageal junction esophagus mucosa esophagus muscularis heart atrial appendage heart left ventricle liver lung minor salivary gland muscle skeletal nerve tibial ovary pancreas pituitary prostate skin not sun exposed suprapubic skin sun exposed lower leg small intestine terminal ileum spleen stomach testis thyroid uterus vagina whole blood 597 49 287 351 812 3811 73400 8 6 20 15 10 5 0 4 2 0 6 6 4 2 0 –2 6 1 0 r 2 1 0 r 2 4 2 0 –2 4 2 0 –2 log10 (bf) log10 (bf) log10 (bf) 20 15 10 5 0 log10 (bf) 20 15 10 5 0 log10 (bf) log10 (bf) log10 (bf) log10 (bf) 6 4 2 0 sfxn5 fgfr1 fgfr1 fgfr1 fgfr1 sfxn5 sfxn5 sfxn5 37800 38000 38200 chromosome 8 position (kb) chromosome 8 position (kb) chromosome 8 position (kb) chromosome 8 position (kb) 38400 38600 37800 38000 38200 38400 38600 37800 38000 38200 38400 38600 37800 38000 38200 38400 38600 73600 73800 chromosome 2 position (kb) rotenone-stimulated day 52 serts unstimulated day 52 serts brain amygdala chromosome 2 position (kb) proliferating fpp day 11 fpp day 11 brain hypothalamus chromosome 2 position (kb) chromosome 2 position (kb) 74000 74200 73400 73600 73800 74000 74200 73400 73600 73800 74000 74200 73400 73600 73800 74000 74200 gtex brain 1101 gtex other tissues fig 5 | colocalization analysis of eqtl with 25 neuro-related gwas traits.this identified eight clusters that were mapped to different cell types (neurons intermediate progenitor cells radial glial progenitor cells satellite cells mesenchymal cells myotube and wnt-positive and pax7-positive cells) using 24 marker genes (supplementary fig 5).the same dimensionality reduction batch correction and clustering steps described above were applied to the two single-cell ipsc datasets analyzed238 (extended data fig 5 and supplementary fig 6).d figure analogous to main text fig 5a additionally including colocalisation results from a pseudobulk eqtl analysis (using cells from all day 52 cells untreated pooled).]
Patterns related to negative correlation with neuronal differentiation efficiency were observed in cluster 2 cells.

Text 579
10.1038/s41588-021-00801-6
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 3 | a gene expression signature in ipscs is associated with neuronal differentiation efficiency. a, venn diagram indicating the overlap of cell lines included in this study and two recent ipsc studies, a bulk rna-seq study37 and an scrna-seq study2. b, histogram of pearson correlation coefficients between variation in gene expression of individual genes (from bulk rna-seq data37) and neuronal differentiation efficiency. two representative genes with positive (tac3) and negative (utf1) associations are highlighted. c, scatterplot of neuronal differentiation efficiency (x axis) versus bulk ipsc gene expression (y axis) for utf1 and tac3. d, umaps of scrna-seq profiles in ipscs from 112 donors2. colors denote the expression levels of the two selected genes from b,c (utf1 and tac3). cluster 2 is shown by the dashed lines. e, comparison of marker gene association results with expression markers of cluster 2. for each gene, a scatterplot is shown of the pearson correlation coefficient of association between ipsc gene expression and neuronal differentiation efficiency (x axis, based on bulk gene expression) versus its log fold change between cluster 2 and all other clusters (y axis, based on scrna-seq data). the genes utf1 and tac3 are highlighted. sc, single-cell. f, scatterplot of neuronal differentiation efficiency (x axis) and the proportion of cells assigned to cluster 2 (y axis) across 45 cell lines that were included in both sets of experiments. when multiple measurements were available for a given cell line, average values are shown. in c,e,f, the pearson’s r and the p value from a two-sided t-test are indicated.']. Reference sentences:[neuronal differentiation efficiency was not associated with the number of lines per pool (r2 = 0.04 p = 0.46 t-test) but was positively correlated with neuronal maturation34 (supplementary fig 3 and extended data fig 1c).finally we considered data from six lines that were both differentiated indi vi- dually and in one pool finding that pooling neither affected neu- ronal differentiation efficiency (extended data fig 3b) nor led to obvious transcriptional differences (supplementary fig 4).using independent bulk rna-seq data for 184 ipsc lines included in this study137 we identified associations between neuronal dif- ferentiation efficiency and gene expression level for 2045 genes (983 positive and 1062 negative associations; f-test false discovery rate (fdr) < 5%; fig 3bc supplementary table 4 and methods).to test this we reanalyzed scrna-seq data from 112 ipsc lines that were assayed previously2 45 of which were also included in this study (methods and fig 3a).cells from cluster 2 overexpressed genes associated with inefficient neuronal differentiation (for example utf1) and downregulated genes associated with efficient neuronal differentiation (for example tac3; fig 3de and extended data fig 5).to more directly assess the relevance of cluster 2 for neuronal differentia- tion efficiency we tested for and confirmed an association between the fraction of cells in cluster 2 and neuronal differentiation effi- ciency for each cell line (pearson r = −0.76 p = 2.05 × 10−9; fig 3f and extended data fig 5d).based on these proportions (cell line pool) combinations were clustered based on euclidean distance (fig 3b and extended data fig 3).only (cell line pool) combinations for which at least ten cells were present at all time points were included in the heatmap in extended data fig 3a and in the principal component analysis shown in extended data fig 3b–d.we also considered the same model trained on the first half of the dataset (pools 1–8) and assessed its performance on the second half of the dataset (pools 9–17) which was generated sequentially over the course of the study (extended data fig 3e).when using the trained model for making predictions we used the predicted score that corresponds to recall of 35% and precision of 100% (extended data fig 3cd).extended data fig 3).b umap as in a coloured by the squared correlation coefficient r2 between correlation of bulk expression and differentiation efficiency (r values are indicated as in fig 3b) and log fold change between one cluster and all others.c violin plots of gene expression for selected pluripotency genes (nanog sox2 pou5f1) as well as marker genes that are upregulated and downregulated respectively in cluster 2 (utf1 tac3 from fig 3).e scatter plot between neuronal differentiation efficiency (x-axis) and the proportion of cells assigned to cluster 2 (y-axis) analogous to fig 3f however using computational estimates of the proportions of cluster 2 cells based for a larger set of hipsci lines (using decon-cell based on bulk rna-seq n = 182; methods).the identification of a subpopulation of ipsc cells was replicated in an independent dataset (see extended figure 3).]
Patterns related to correlation between gene expression and neuronal differentiation efficiency in single cells were identified, with specific genes showing positive or negative associations.

Text 580
10.1126/sciadv.abc5464
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 3. mapping of the splenic cite-seq atlas into histology sections profiled with codex. (a) schematics of the procedure for mapping the codex and cite-seq protein expression spaces. anchors are identified using mutual nearest neighbors and weighted according to their consistency with the mrna expression space (left). these anchors are used to consolidate the codex and cite-seq protein expression spaces into a common space (middle). the transfer matrix ℳciteseq→codex is built by looking at the nearest codex cells to each cite-seq cell in this space (right). (b) mapping of cells from the cite-seq atlas into a splenic section profiled with codex.the figure shows the locations of cells in the section with antigenic profiles similar to those of six cells from the cite-seq atlas. t and b cell zones are indicated with solid and dashed lines, respectively. (c) consistency between the annotations of two spleens profiled by cite-seq and mapped onto the same codex dataset. the heatmap shows the correlation between the codex cell assignments for each cell population. (d) number of annotated cells in the codex dataset as a function of the number of cells in the cite-seq atlas. the annotated cells are indicated in a umap representation of the codex protein expression.']. Reference sentences:[we then used a mutual nearest neighbors anchoring strategy (13 14) to consolidate the signal component of the two datasets into a common protein expression space (fig 3a; online methods).2021; 7 : eabc5464 5 march 2021 scie n c e a d v a nces | resea r ch a rt icl e 4 of 16 dendritic cells (pdcs) in t cell zones; the location of monocytes in the red pulp; and the positioning of cd4 conventional dendritic cells (cdcs) along the bridging channels that connect t cell zones and the red pulp (fig 3b) (23).codex cell population assignments were consistent across cite-seq replicates (fig 3c; me- dian pearson’s correlation r = 0.998 p < 10−10) and the inferred rela- tive spatial distributions were reproducible across multiple spleens profiled with codex (fig s5).for example in- creasing the number of neighbors (ktransfer) in the ℳciteseq → codex transfer matrix (fig 3a; online methods) to 1500 led to the anno- tation of 97% of the codex cells with a specificity >80% for most cell populations (fig s8).the percentage of codex cells annotated by stvea decreased from 73% when using the entire cite-seq atlas (7097 cells) to 38% when using only 1000 cells (fig 3d).2021; 7 : eabc5464 5 march 2021 scie n c e a d v a nces | resea r ch a rt icl e 5 of 16 fig 3.higher sensitivity (at the cost of reducing specificity) could be obtained by increasing the num- ber of neighbors (ktransfer) in the ℳciteseq → codex transfer matrix (fig 3a; online methods).to assess mapping uncertainties (fig 3c) we com- puted the pearson’s correlation coefficient of the vectors c jc codex that result from restricting the above sum to cells in each of the two mice profiled with cite-seq.]
Summary: Correlation between cell populations in single-cell datasets mapped using mutual nearest neighbors anchoring strategy.

Text 581
10.1038/s41422-021-00479-9
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 4 the origins of emerging neuron clusters induced by sni. a, b rnascope results show that the percentage of cldn9+ neurons was decreased after sni (n = 3). scale bar, 20 µm. c a heatmap shows the pearson correlation among different neuron clusters based on whole transcript counts. d a proposed model for the neuron type switches induced by sni. e, f dual ﬂuorescent ish combined with immunostaining shows the co-expression of tdtomato (red), mrgprd (green) and gal (blue) in drg neurons of mrgprd-creer::ai9 mice. a part of mrgprd+ neurons expressed gal but express much less mrgprd (arrowheads) 2 days after sni (n = 3). scale bar, 20 µm. the data are shown as means ± sem. p < 0.001 vs the control group.']. Reference sentences:[rnascope assay showed that the percentage of gal+ neurons was increased from 25% under normal condition to 40% at sni 2d (supplementary information fig s7a–c) while the percentage of cldn9+ neurons was decreased from 14% to 5% (fig 4a b).the heatmap showed that sniic1 (atf3high/gfra3+/gal+) was highly correlated with sniic2 (atf3high/mrgprd+) and c1-1 (cldn9+/gal+ neurons) while sniic3 (atf3high/s100b+/gal+ neurons) was close to c8 (trappc3l+ myelinated neurons) (fig 4c).these data suggested that sniic2 and c1-1 were switched to sniic1 after sni and c8 could be the origin of sniic3 (fig 4d).we performed ish and immunohistochemistry to evaluate the expres- sion of gal atf3 and mrgprd in the drgs of mrgprd-creer::ai9 mice after sni (fig 4e).gal was not expressed in tdtomato-labeling neurons (fig 4e) and mrgprd was expressed almost in all tdtomato- labeling neurons under normal condition (fig 4e).however ~18% of tdtomato-labeled neurons expressed gal but not mrgprd at sni 2d (fig 4e f) while ~26% of tdtomato-labeled neurons expressed atf3 but not mrgprd at sni 2d (supplementary information fig s8f).]
Summary: Correlation patterns between different neuron clusters after nerve injury, with specific switches in neuron types observed.

Text 582
10.1038/s41593-020-00794-1
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 3 | scrna-seq identifies early mesenchymal cell population. a, lum and alx1 are mesenchymal cell type and early sample markers. in both progenitor and cortex clusterings, lum marks a separate population of cells, as shown by the feature plot on the left. lum expression is highly specific to the mesenchymal cell type and is enriched in early samples. alx1 expression is highly correlated to lum as shown in the right feature plot, and is similarly enriched in early, mesenchymal populations. b, lum is widely expressed early and diminishes later. immunostaining for lum (cyan) shows prevalent expression in and between progenitors marked by sox2 (red) at cs16, but this expression dissipates by cs22. however, expression of lum does not begin until week 7 in the h1 organoid. scale bars are 50μm. c, alx1 is sparsely expressed early and diminishes later. immunostaining for alx1 (cyan) shows sparse expression in pax6 (green) positive cells; it disappears from the cortex but is expressed in surrounding brain structures at cs22. alx1 expression does not begin until week 10 in the 13,234 cerebral organoids. for all panels, each sample was immunostained once. scale bars, 50μm.']. Reference sentences:[in our data lum expression is highly enriched in the mesenchymal cell popula- tion and diminishes substantially after early developmental time- points (fig 3a).another marker of this cluster was alx1 which also has one of the most correlated gene expression patterns to lum (fig 3b).we observed prevalent lum staining in our samples at or before cs16 with alx1 at the edges of the fore- brain including several colocalized pax6-positive cells (fig 3cd and supplementary fig 18 and 19).]
Patterns related to correlation between lum and alx1 expressions in early mesenchymal cells. Lum is highly expressed early and diminishes later, while alx1 is sparsely expressed early and diminishes later.

Text 583
10.1038/s41593-020-00794-1
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 5 | mouse models different aspects of early cell types. a, comparison of mouse forebrain clusters to primary progenitor cell types. heatmap showing the comparison of mouse forebrain clusters from 16,053 cells to the primary progenitor populations identified in this dataset. correlations are performed using pearson correlations between cluster marker sets and identify that progenitor clusters 4 and 7 do not have a counterpart in mouse data. b, c1orf61 is widely expressed in early human but not early mouse progenitors. fluorescent in situ hybridization of human samples at cs16 shows broad expression of c1orf61 (cyan) in progenitor cells labeled by sox2 (red). parallel in situ staining in ts16 mouse shows no c1orf61 expression. scale bars, 50μm. c, id4 is widely expressed in early human but not early mouse progenitors. immunostaining of human samples at cs16 shows broad expression of id4 (cyan) in progenitor cells labeled by sox2 (red). a parallel staining in ts16 mouse shows no id4 expression. scale bars, 50μm. d, violin plots of id4 rna expression across several css (human) and embryonic days (mouse). id4 rna expression in the human persists onward from cs13. however, id4 rna expression in the mouse peaks at e11.5 (ts20) and dissipates. for all panels, each sample was immunostained once.']. Reference sentences:[additionally in our previous analysis some clusters from these early samples were marked ‘unknown’ in identity15; our correlation analysis is sufficient to now assign cell type identities to these clusters (supplementary fig 5).comparison of these subpopula- tions to the nine progenitor subtypes identified across all samples demonstrated strong correspondence to these nine cell types with additional heterogeneity in the cs12 and cs13 mesenchymal populations (supplementary fig 5b and supplementary table 10).using a correlative threshold we observed that seven of the nine human populations had at least one corresponding cluster in the mouse single-cell data (fig 5a).indeed no fluorescent in situ signal for c1orf61 or immunostaining signal for id4 was identifiable in the mouse forebrain at ts14 or 16 (fig 5b and supplementary fig 20–22).in the mouse id4 peaks at e11.5 and is low after e13 whereas human id4 is sustained in its expression pattern after cs13 (fig 5d).]
Patterns of correlation between human and mouse progenitor clusters, with differences in expression of c1orf61 and id4.

Text 584
10.1038/s41586-021-03569-1
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 4 | pathological fibroblasts and ensuing fibrosis in covid-19. a, coefficient of determination (r2) of days from symptom onset to death and fibrosis score in covid-19 samples (n = 16, see methods). error bands, 95% s.e. interval on the pearson correlation. b, umap of fibroblast (fb) sub-populations; inset indicates group assignments. path., pathological. c, fractions of pathological fibroblasts among all fibroblasts in control (n = 7) and covid-19 lungs (n = 19). middle line, median; box edges, 25th and 75th percentiles; whiskers, most extreme points that do not exceed ±1.5 × iqr. wilcoxon rank-sum test.']. Reference sentences:[we identified monocytes (n = 3176) monocyte-derived macrophages (mdms; n = 9534) transitioning mdms (n = 4203) and resident alveolar macrophages (ams; n = 12511) which were recovered as distinct trajectories in diffusion component (dc) analysis and were more frequent in covid-19 lungs (fig 2a–c extended data fig 4b–i supplementary tables 2 4 5).the degree of fibrosis (determined by a sirius red fibrosis score see methods) was correlated with disease duration (fig 4a) indicat- ing that lung fibrosis increases over time in covid-19.we identified five fibroblast subtypes: alveolar (n = 4670) adventitial (n = 3773) pathological (n = 2322) intermediate pathological (n = 8779) and other (n = 1099) (fig 4b extended data fig 12e).the main driver of differences in the fibroblast cluster was the increased frequency of pathological or intermediate pathological fibroblasts (henceforth collectively referred to as pfbs) in covid-19 lungs compared to control lungs (fig 4c extended data fig 12f).extended data fig 4 | global changes in myeloid cells.]
Patterns of correlation between fibrosis score and disease duration in covid-19 lungs, with increased pathological fibroblasts.

Text 585
10.1016/j.stem.2021.04.012
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 3. the dynamics of dna methylation and chromatin accessibility in human oocytes and ovarian somatic cells (a–c) 3d scatterplots of mofa based on gene expression, dna methylation and chromatin accessibility in human oocytes and ovarian somatic cells. the scatterplots were colored by the cell type (a), average wcg methylation level (b), or average gch methylation level in single cells (c). (d) pearson correlation of average wcg and gch methylation levels in single cells from human go1 to go2 oocytes. (e) pearson correlation of dna methylation levels among human fgcs and oocytes (left to right). (f) common ndrs (c1) and dndrs (c2 and c3) between human go1 and go2 oocytes. (g) motif enrichment analysis of common ndrs and dndrs detected between the human go1 and go2 oocytes. (h) dynamics of dna methylation and chromatin accessibility around ndrs overlapped with ctcf binding motifs in human oocytes. see also figure s4.']. Reference sentences:[moreover the dna methylation levels of 1-kb tiles were mostly below 0.1 in both the go1 oocytes and in fetal germ cells from 17-week-old human female embryos (guo et al. 2015) in which the global genomic dna demethylation process was com- plete (figure 3e).thus we sought to identify these factors such as tfs by analyzing dndrs between go1 and go2 oocytes (figure 3f).we performed motif enrichment analysis based on these dndrs (figure 3g) and subsequent analysis revealed that the dna methylation levels around the presumable binding sites for some tfs such as ctcf and sp1 (figures 3h and s5a) re- mained very low during human oocyte growth.when the de novo methyl- ation happened in go2 those highly accessible tiles gained a much higher dna methylation level than those lowly ones a d f e b g h c figure 3.moreover ctcf was highly expressed (figure 3g) and its binding motifs were en- riched in distal ndrs during human oocyte growth (figures 3g 3h and s3e).however the pre- sumable binding sites for ctcf were resistant to de novo dna methylation in human (figure 3h) a finding that needs further mechanistic study.]
Summary: Correlation between DNA methylation levels and chromatin accessibility in human oocytes and somatic cells, with motif enrichment analysis and resistance to de novo methylation at ctcf binding sites.

Text 586
10.1016/j.stem.2021.04.012
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 7. correlations between histone modifications and de novo dna methylation in human oocytes (a) coefficient variation (cv) of dna methylation of de novo methylated tiles in various genomic features among individual oocytes. (b) immunoﬂuorescence staining of adult human ovarian tissues for h3k4me3, h3k36me2, and h3k36me3. tissues were counterstained with ddx4 and dapi. (c) average wcg methylation level of cgis overlapped or not overlapped with h3k4me3 loci in human or mouse oocytes, respectively. (d) umap plots of human oocytes and ovarian somatic cells generated in figure 1b colored by the expression level of genes related to histone modifications. (e) immunoﬂuorescence staining of adult human ovarian tissues for lsd2, nsd2, setd2, kdm2a, and kdm2b. tissues were counterstained with ddx4 and dapi. (f) counterstaining of nsd2 and dapi with either h3k36me3, lsd2, or dnmt1. (g) boxplots of wcg and gch methylation levels in cgis with or without presumable kdm2a/b-bindings in each cell group. (h) proportion of gc content in kdm2a/b binding cgis and other cgis. see also figure s7 and table s5.']. Reference sentences:[because our dna methylation data were generated at single- cell resolution we could calculate the cvs (coefficient of varia- tions) of de novo methylated tiles at each genomic element within individual oocytes reﬂecting the synchrony in the methylation of different loci in single oocytes (figure 7a).the results showed that the cvs of dna methylation in individual mature oocytes were very low in both genome-wide and specific elements as expected (figure 7a).however in gos the cvs of dna methylation were significantly higher than the controls (figure 7a) indicating that the de novo methyl- ation was asynchrony in different loci within individual gos.notably the de novo methylated cgis showed the highest cvs in human and mouse gos while human-specific sva elements represented the lowest cvs (figure 7a).h3k4me3 is a constitutive histone maker and its signal could be detected in both human oocytes and ovarian somatic cells (figure 7b).we further validated lsd2’s expres- sion at protein level in human oocytes (figure 7e) indicating that the active removal of h3k4me2 by lsd2 might be conserved between human and mouse oocytes during de novo dna methylation.we found another interesting difference between humans and mice because the kdm2a/b two h3k36me demethylases were both highly expressed in human gos (figures 7d s7f and s7g) and localized in the nucleus (figure 7e).surprisingly those cgis with presumable kdm2a/b-binding escaped de novo dna methylation in human oocytes and remained free of dna methylation even in ovarian somatic cells (figure 7g).un- like ovarian somatic cells which showed higher chromatin accessibility levels in presumable kdm2a/b-binding cgis (figure 7g) human oocytes exhibited comparable levels of chromatin accessibility between kdm2a/b-binding and other cgis during the de novo methylation period (figure 7g).more- over the kdm2a/b binding cgis were more richness in gc- content (figure 7h; table s5) reﬂecting an intrinsic property of these cgis that might be involved in antagonizing dna methylation.more a c e f h g d b figure 7.approximately 60% of cgis would be modified with h3k4me3 and were essentially free of dna methylation during human oocyte growth (figure 7c) whereas a proportion of h3k4me3 unmodified cgis would be methylated (figures 7a and 7c).p-values were calculated by the fisher’s exact test (figures 2c 2d 2f 3g 4a 5f 5g and 6a) or two-tailed student’s t-test (figures 4b 4g 6b 6d and figure 7g).]
Patterns of correlation between histone modifications and de novo DNA methylation in single cells, including low DNA methylation variation in mature oocytes and differential methylation in specific elements.

Text 587
10.1038/s41592-021-01129-z
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 6 | linking enhancers to regulated genes reveals mechanisms underlying eht in ys and agm. a, experimental design using cotech for analyzing chromatin regulation of gene expression during eht from ys and agm tissues. facs, fluorescence-activated cell sorting. b,c, umap projection based on mofa factors inferred using 512 agm cells (b) and 736 ys cells (c). ec-mes, ec with mesenchymal features. d, pseudotime analysis of agm–eht and ys–eht. e, heat maps showing rna (left) and h3k27ac (right) signals at gene-correlated peaks in 175 agm cells. the rows represent 115 degs. f, line plots showing average rna, h3k27ac signals of two gene clusters as in e. g, heat maps showing rna (left) and h3k27ac (right) signals at gene-correlated peaks in 122 ys cells. rows represent 104 degs. h, line plots showing average rna, h3k27ac signals of two gene clusters as in g. i, distribution of peak numbers of genes shown in e around tss±500 kb of genes. j, distribution of peak numbers of genes shown in g around tss ± 500 kb of genes. k, ma plot (log-ratio by mean average) comparing h3k27ac profiles between ys–ec and agm–early ec. h3k27ac signals were calculated by counting the reads at the genes±100-kb regions and normalized by read depth. l,m, examples for inferred enhancer-to-target-gene links for hoxb4 (l) and meis1 (m) in ys–ec, ys–hec, agm–ec and agm–hec.']. Reference sentences:[to understand the difference in the regulatory basis leading to programmed cell-fate decisions in eht between agm and ys we performed cotech for h3k27ac (an active enhancer mark)39 and rna in cd31+ endothelial cells in agm and ys of e9.5 and e10.5 mouse embryos (fig 6a).having performed cell clustering followed by pseudotime ordering we identified different subpopulations annotated by specific marker gene expression: early endothelial cell (ec) (pecam1 pf4 mest) late ec (pecam1 cald1 egfl7) and hemo- genic endothelial cell (hec) (pecam1 itgb3 runx1) for agm cells and ec (pecam1 cdh5 ccnd2) hec (pecam1 itgb3 runx1) and ec with mesenchymal features (pecam1 col1a1 col1a2) in ys cells (fig 6bc and extended data fig 6a–f).the dynamic trend in both gene expression and h3k27ac signals at the corresponding gene-enhancer-linked regions was well correlated along pseudo- time indicating the pivotal role for lineage-specific enhancers in regulating cell-fate decisions during eht (fig 6e–h).together these data support the specificity during eht rather than being due to technical noise (extended data fig 6g–j).the eht in ys and agm was accom- panied by the dynamic change of a set of core transcription factors (tfs) (such as runx1 and spi1) whose motif enrichment scores were calculated by chromvar41 in accordance with corresponding tf gene expression (extended data fig 6k–n).notably the average number of enhancer peaks regulating corresponding target genes in ys–eht cells was sig- nificantly higher than that in agm–eht cells at ±500 kb around degs (p = 3.3 × 10−4 mann–whitney u-test; fig 6ij).consistently we found that the h3k27ac signals around hoxb4 in agm were significantly upregulated in agm compared to that in ys (false discovery rate < 0.05 and log2 fold change > 0.5) whereas the meis1 gene loci exhibited a higher enhancer activity in ys (fig 6k).the inferred enhancer–hoxb4 and enhancer–meis1 pairs dis- played highly selective enrichment in agm–eht and ys–eht respectively (fig 6lm).likewise evident enhancer–runx1 links were identified both in agm–eht and ys–eht cells while more profound in ys–eht at this stage (extended data fig 6o).cells are colored as in fig 6. c umap visualization of expression of marker genes for agm cells.cells are colored as in fig 6. f umap visualization of expression of marker genes for ys cells.]
Patterns related to correlation between gene expression and enhancer activity during endothelial cell fate decisions in ys and agm tissues were analyzed.

Text 588
10.1038/s41592-021-01129-z
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 4 | cotech reveals both coupling and uncoupling of dynamic histone modifications and transcription from naive to primed mescs. a, moving average plots showing correlation between rna and h3k4me3 signals at tss±5kb (green) and gene body±100kb (magenta) using aggregate cotech data. b, distribution of correlation between rna and h3k4me3 signals in single cells. c, scatter-plots showing spearman correlation coefficients of h3k27me3 versus rna signals (x axis) and h3k4me3 versus rna (y axis). each dot represents one gene (top 2,000 variable genes were used). d, heat map showing normalized rna signals of degs across 6,993 mescs (left), normalized h3k4me3 (middle) signals in 3,907 cells and h3k27me3 (right) signals in 3,086 cells at gene body±100-kb regions. the 129 degs were clustered to three clades. the columns represent single cells ordered by pseudotime. e, aggregate curves showing average rna, h3k4me3 and h3k27me3 signals in d of three gene classes as in d. f, heat map showing the normalized rna signals of degs across 6,993 mescs (left), normalized h3k4me3 (middle) signals in 3,907 cells and h3k27me3 (right) signals in 3,086 cells at gene body±100-kb regions. the 3,104 unchanged genes were divided into three groups on the basis of expression level. columns represent single cells ordered by pseudotime. g, aggregate curves showing average rna, h3k4me3 and h3k27me3 signals of three gene classes as in f.']. Reference sentences:[cotech experiments in mescs presented high robust- ness and reproducibility without batch effect for both dna and rna partition (extended data fig 4a–e).projection of topic scores by uniform mani- fold approximation and projection (umap) allowed us to discern these populations (extended data fig 4fg).in addition gene ontology (go) term enrichment analysis for the topics reinforced cell type identities (extended data fig 4h).using rna profiles cells were clustered into two subpopula- tions (c1 and c2) annotated as ‘naive mescs’ and ‘primed mescs’ according to the expression of pluripotency marker genes (fig 3bc and extended data fig 4i).the concordance of h3k4me3-rna was markedly profound compared to those by chance (extended data fig 4jk).in agreement with previous reports on bulk chip-seq data aggregate cotech data in mescs presented a positive cor- relation between the transcriptional level and h3k4me3 signals on both the regions of transcription start site (tss) ± 5 kb (pearson correlation coefficient; 0.75) and gene body ± 100 kb (pearson cor- relation coefficient; 0.79) (fig 4a)28–30.however when examined at single-cell resolution this correlation was dramatically reduced to 0.05 at tss regions (fig 4b) despite several pluripotency genes such as pou5f1 and klf4 still displaying an overall positive consis- tency (fig 4c).we ordered single cells on the basis of rna profiles along a pseudotime tra- jectory by monocle 2 (extended data fig 4lm).genes in the single-cell matrix were clustered into three classes according to the dynamic expression pattern along pseudotime (fig 4de).nevertheless no apparent effects of h3k4me3 on gene expression were observed if we first clustered genes on the basis of changes in h3k4me3 signal (extended data fig 4n).to further dissect the power of h3k4me3 signals we calculated the correlation of pseudotemporal ordering of single cells between rna and histone signals for visualization on the same scatter-plot with an overall correlation of 0.6 (pearson cor- relation coefficient) (extended data fig 4o).likewise we examined the dynamics on constitutive genes in three quantiles ranked by transcription level finding no change in each molecular level along pseudotime and suggesting that specificity was identified from most degs (fig 4fg).pseudotime analysis 0 0.08 0.16 0.24 0 25 10 20 proportion (%) correlation (spearman) 15 5 35 30 0 10000 tpm (rna) scaled rpkm (h3k4me3) genes with expression from low to high 6 2 4 0 20000 tss ± 5 kb gene body ± 100 kb random tss ± 5 kb gene body ± 100 kb r = 0.79 r = 0.75 −0.2 0 0.2 −0.2 0 0.2 0.4 rna/h3k27me3 correlation rna/h3k4me3 correlation pou5f1 klf4 esrrb nme2 tfcp2l1 a b c sub1 c1 c2 rna+h3k27me3 rna+h3k4me3 rna single cells n = 129 (degs) h3k4me3 rna h3k27me3 low high rpl41 rpl18a jarid2 pou5f1 rpl3 rps7 sox2 rps8 rpl8 h3k4me3 h3k27me3 d e c1 c2 rna n = 3104 (unchanged genes) h3k4me3 rna h3k27me3 h3k4me3 h3k27me3 f g high mid low high mid low high low high low pseudotime scaled signal scaled signal scaled signal scaled signal scaled signal scaled signal pseudotime pseudotime pseudotime pseudotime pseudotime pseudotime pseudotime rna+h3k27me3 rna+h3k4me3 fig 4 | cotech reveals both coupling and uncoupling of dynamic histone modifications and transcription from naive to primed mescs.as a caveat technical dropouts in dual omics cannot be fully excluded as a confounding factor for relatively low correlations between h3k4me3 and rna in a subset of genes (fig 4d) as well as during inferring bivalent domains (fig 5bc).for correlation analysis between different experiments in fig 2 and extended data fig 4 we quantified dna signals at peak regions by reads per kilobase per million mapped reads.for single cells with both h3k4me3 and transcriptome data in fig 4 the correlations between h3k4me3 signals at tss ± 5 kb or gene body ± 100 kb and gene expression were assessed.]
Summary: Correlation patterns between histone modifications and gene expression in single cells transition from naive to primed states, revealing coupling and uncoupling dynamics.

Text 589
10.1038/s41592-021-01129-z
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 2 | assessing the ability of cotech to capture histone mark and transcription in single cells. a, scatter-plot of the human–mouse test for cells with both dna and rna profiles obtained. b, track view displaying both h3k4me3 and rna signals on a representative locus in nih 3t3 cells. bulk h3k4me3 chip-seq and rna-seq data were downloaded from gsm1544520 and gsm970853, respectively. c, pearson correlation of h3k4me3 signals between two cotech experiments. aggregate h3k4me3 signals were log10 normalized. two-sided correlation coefficients, p<2.2×10−16. d, average h3k4me3 signals from different datasets were plotted at the 2-kb flanking regions around the centers of 25,311 peaks. bulk data were from gsm1544520. e, scatter-plot showing pearson correlation of transcriptome between two cotech experiments. the transcription level was normalized as transcripts per million (tpm). two-sided correlation coefficients, p<2.2×10−16. f, the distribution of detected umis between two cotech experiments in nih 3t3 cells (n=844). g,h, violin plots showing the distribution of nonduplicated reads (dna) (g), gene number (rna) (h) in different datasets across cotech (n=844 and 6,993 for nih 3t3 and mesc datasets, respectively) and sccc (n=5,650, 26,480 for hct-116_n2a and mouse_cortex datasets, respectively). processed data were downloaded from gse148448. gene numbers were calculated using the reads mapped to gene exons here. the boxes in violin plots indicate upper and lower quartiles (25th and 75th percentiles).']. Reference sentences:[we found that the collision rate (the proportion of cells coincidentally receiving the same barcode combination) was ~4% for both dna and rna partitions while with the overall collision rate of ~8% if including undetectable within-species doublets confirming a suc- cessful indexing strategy for distinguishing single cells (fig 2a extended data fig 2a–c and supplementary table 2).the cross-cell contamination by decontx22 yielded the median per- centage of contamination for human and mouse cells of 10% and 12% respectively (extended data fig 2d).we found that reads from the rna library were highly enriched in exonic regions as demonstrated in the regions of vim gene loci from both aggregate cotech single-cell and bulk data (fig 2b).expectedly we observed strong h3k4me3 signals at the promoter region of the representative gene for the cor- responding dna portion of cotech low-input in situ chip-seq and bulk chip-seq datasets (fig 2b).for the dna partition of cotech we acquired a median of 1153 nonduplicated reads in 844 coassayed cells obtaining 23149 peaks from aggregate cotech profiles with a strong overlap with bulk chip-seq peaks (extended data fig 2e–g).global analysis revealed a high correlation (pearson correlation coefficient 0.92) for the aggregate h3k4me3 signals between two cotech experiments (fig 2cd).we observed a higher frip (62% versus 32%) and comparable sensitivity (8% in top 50 out of 844 single cells in cotech versus 7% in top 50 out of 96 single cells in the scatac dataset) supporting a good performance of cotech (extended data fig 2hi and supplementary table 2).cotech rna profiles were also highly reproducible between two experiments (pearson correlation coefficient 0.87; fig 2e).the cotech experiments on nih 3t3 yielded a median of 3490 umis per cell from 844 sin- gle cells (fig 2f).we found that 75% rna reads mapped to the mouse genome with 40% of those mapped to exons (extended data fig 2j).compared with sccc with a different design18 cotech captured more nonduplicated reads per cell in dna parts (~1500 reads in cotech versus ~10 reads in sccc) (fig 2gh and extended data fig 2k).we found that there were inappreciable differences in both the nonduplicated reads and gene numbers detected per cell whereas cotech exhibited markedly higher umis than all of those (extended data fig 2l).we plotted the scatter-plot using the proportion of human reads in each barcode combination in fig 2.for correlation analysis between different experiments in fig 2 and extended data fig 4 we quantified dna signals at peak regions by reads per kilobase per million mapped reads.the boxes in violin plots of extended data fig 2d h-j and l indicate upper and lower quartiles (25th and 75th percentiles).]
Patterns related to correlation between h3k4me3 signals and transcriptome levels in single cells were analyzed.

Text 590
10.1038/s41467-021-22804-x
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig. 2 integration analysis across 14 multiple myeloma patients revealing distinct cancer populations and immune microenvironments during diseaseprogression. a bar plots showing cell type fractions for each sample. colors indicate cell type. b single-cell variant allele fractions (vaf) for driver mutations. each bubble is colored by the cell type with the associated vaf, and total cells supporting the variant are labeled atop each bubble. c heatmap showing pairwise correlation of average expression for malignant cells in each sample. genomic alterations with either fish evidence or at least another two levels of evidence shown above. d t-sne plots showing the integration of samples from multiple patients for a given time point. clustering of cells from different time points are colored by patient (top) or by cell type (bottom). the remission group includes one remission sample, one pre-transplant, and one post-transplant. e proportion of t/nk cells within the total t/nk cell cohort for each sample. the proportion of t and nk cells within each sample is shown at the bottom as a color bar. f tsne plot showing cd8+ t cells from all the patients where cd8+ t cells are available. cells from the primary sample of patients 77570 and 83942 and relapse-2 sample of patient 27522 are colored specifically. g expression pattern of kmt2a and kmt2c in cd8+ t cells for each sample]]]
Summary: Correlation patterns of gene expression in malignant cells across multiple myeloma patients during disease progression.

Text 591
10.1186/s13073-021-00885-z
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 3 cryopreservation maintains the integrity and complexity of single-cell transcriptomes in clinical human cancers. a, b number of genes (a) and umis (b) detected per cell across all ft, ccs, ct and co replicates from breast (bc-p1, bc-p2 and bc-p3), prostate (pc-p1 and pc-p2) and melanoma samples (m-p1). sequencing libraries were downsampled to equal number of mapped reads per cell using the cellranger aggregate function to account for differences in sequencing depth. note that only one ccs replicate in m-p1 (orange) and one ct replicate in bc-p1 (purple) had significantly lower number of genes and umis per cell compared to their matching ft replicate. statistical significance was determined using an unpaired student’s t test. p values denoted by asterisks: p < 0.05, p < 0.01, p < 0.001 and p < 0.0001. c pseudobulk gene correlations between ft cells with ccs (red line) and ct or co (blue line) replicates. correlation values (adjusted-r2) were computed using linear regression in r to model the log-normalised gene expression values between two replicates. in all cases, ccs replicates had higher r2 values compared to ct and co comparisons. d cluster-level gene correlations between ft cells with ccs (circle), ct (triangle) and co (square) replicates show similar trends with pseudobulk gene correlations. dotted lines join corresponding clusters between different comparison methods. plasmablasts (c18 in bc-p1 and c22 in bc-p2) were the only cell type identified in multiple cases to have significantly lower correlations']. Reference sentences:[this revealed that an average of 1809 1842 and 1694 genes and 6149 6525 and 5851 umis per cell were detected across all ft ccs and ct repli- cates respectively (fig 3a b).within matched cases only cryopreserved cell suspension conditions from m-p1 (from both ccs and co) yielded a lower aver- age number of genes and umis per cell compared to the ft (fig 3a b).similarly only one ct replicate (bc-p1) had a significantly lower number of genes and umis detected per cell compared to the ft (fig 3a b).bulk gene correlations revealed high r2 values between ft and all cryopreserved replicates (r2 > 0.90; fig 3c) where on average ccs replicates had higher r2 values with the ft sample (mean r2 = 0.98 min = 0.95 and max = 0.99) compared to the ct replicates (mean r2 = 0.96 min = 0.93 and max = 0.99) (fig 3c).similarly we examined if this trend was unique to particular cell types on the cluster level (fig 3d).cluster correlations revealed consistent trends with the bulk comparisons where ccs replicates consist- ently showed slightly higher r2 correlation than with ft replicates (fig 3d).although a majority of clusters displayed high correlations (r2 > 0.90; indicated by the red line in fig 3d) several smaller clusters showed sig- nificantly lower correlations than the bulk (r2 < 0.90; fig 3d) including five clusters in bc-p1 (c13—cancer/ epithelial c20—cancer/epithelial c17—t cells c11— endothelial and c18—plasmablasts) four clusters in bc-p2 (c19—perivascular c21—pdcs c20—t cells and c22—plasmablasts) two clusters in bc-p3 (c7— monocyte/macrophage and c17—unassigned cluster) six clusters in pc-p1 (c17—nk cells c5—cancer/epi- thelial c15—endothelial c9 perivascular c19—mast cells and c14—cancer/epithelial) and one cluster in m- p1 (c17—cafs).genome medicine (2021) 13:81 page 9 of 17 correlation values across multiple cases (r2 < 0.80) was plasmablasts (c18 in bc-p1 and c22 in bc-p2) sug- gesting that this cell type is more prone to transcrip- tional changes due to cryopreservation (fig 3d).genome medicine (2021) 13:81 page 11 of 17 3a b) and gene correlations (fig 3c d) only have minor impacts on the conservation of key biological pathways.]
Patterns of gene expression correlations between fresh and cryopreserved single cells, with cryopreserved cells showing higher correlation values. Some cell types, like plasmablasts, exhibit lower correlations, indicating potential transcriptional changes due to cryopreservation.

Text 592
10.1038/s41467-021-22931-5
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 3 cluster-rna-seq analysis supports the spatial segregation of nephric duct progenitors. a schematic representation of the nephric duct depicting the spatial location of progenitor (pr) populations according to three different models. cell identities are color-coded. b schematic representation of cluster rna-seq and visium 10× spatial transcriptomics procedures. c pearson correlation heatmap between cluster and single cell libraries, nephric duct lineage only. single cells are color coded by nephric duct progenitor (ndpr) identity ndpr1, ndpr2, ndpr3 and ndpr4. a summary of the main ndpr identity of cluster subgroups is shown at the bottom. d pearson correlation heatmap between nephric duct rostral spatial and cluster rna-seq libraries. e proposed model for the spatial organization of ndpr in the nephric duct based on the cluster rna-seq analysis. sc: single cell. cl: cluster.']. Reference sentences:[each of these regions exhibit different morphologies and behavior during the nd elongation process20 (supplementary fig 3a and b).tfap2a another tfap2 family member and nd marker (fig 1c) showed a similar pattern of expression as tfap2b (supplementary fig 3b).at e10 jag1 notch2 and kdelr2 confirmed an enriched expression of ndpr3 markers in the mesonephric connecting segment (cns) located between nd and mesonephric tubule cells (supplemen- tary fig 3c).to assess the spatial heterogeneity of the different cell populations (fig 3a) we developed a strategy called cluster rna sequencing (cl-rnaseq).pax2- gfp positive cell clusters were generated by partial trypsinization and facs sorting for large-size gfp positive units (fig 3b and supplementary fig 1).the resulting libraries generated 6 clusters (cl-a to cl-f) representative of all four major nd cell populations (fig 3c supplementary fig 5b-c).pearson correlation analysis found association between cl-a cl-b and cl-d with ndpr4 ndpr1 and ndpr3 respectively (r > 0.6 and random permutation p < 0.01) (fig 3c supplementary data 1).interestingly cl-c cl-e and cl-f harbored mixed ndpr identities (ndpr1/2; ndpr2/3 and ndpr2/ 4 respectively) (fig 3c and supplementary data 1).this transcriptomic analysis of small spots extracted from the rostral region of the nd (about 10 cells per spot) confirmed the enrichment and proximity of ndpr1 ndpr2 and ndpr3 (found in cluster subgroups b c d and e) but not ndpr4 (found in cluster subgroups a and f) (fig 3d and supplementary data 1 supplementary fig 5d).importantly caudal explants additionally elongated and extended cell protrusions characteristic of nd tip cells35 (fig 2e 4f ndpr4 panel and supplementary fig 3a).single cell rna-seq data indicated that tfap2a and tfap2b are both expressed in the nd and showed a similar pattern of expression whereas other tfap2 members are not significantly expressed (supplementary fig 3a and supple- mentary fig 10a).]
Summary: Correlation patterns between different nephric duct progenitor populations based on spatial transcriptomics analysis.

Text 593
10.1038/s41467-021-22973-9
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 3 gene expression along neutrotime. a gene expression correlation with neutrotime. genes with spearman correlation ≥ 0.25 (n = 48) and ≤ −0.25 (n = 66) are highlighted. b gene expression heatmap of the top 50 positively and negatively correlated (spearman) genes along neutrotime. c gene expression profiles of select genes along neutrotime. d ranked gene sets from gene set enrichment analysis (gsea) versus false discovery rate. e normalized enrichment score of gsea gene sets versus false discovery rate. f significantly enriched gene sets. neutrophil-specific terms are highlighted in magenta. gsea was performed as previously described.76 in short, a normalized enrichment score was calculated by going through a list of genes based on their spearman correlation with neutrotime as a pre-ranked list and calculating a running-sum statistic, which was then normalized for differences in the sizes of the gene sets that were looked at (normalized enrichment score). to account for multiple hypothesis testing, an fdr approach was used to maintain a defined level of significance, values < 0.01 were considered.']. Reference sentences:[varying the assumptions of k nearest neighbors and resolution parameters of the community detection algorithm within reasonable parameters (k = 20; 100; 500 and resolution = 0.3; 0.8; 1.5) yielded between 3 and 23 clusters (supplementary fig 3a).using the finest clustering and inspecting gene expression associated with each cluster we eliminated 0.42% of cells from further consideration as debris because of their concentrated ribosomal and mitochondrial transcripts (e.g. rps19 rps28 mt-atp6 rps18 rpl32 rpl13 mt- co3 and rpl18a)2021 (supplementary fig 3b).for this analysis we again chose the same 4 populations although similar tendencies were identified across models (supplementary fig 3a b).for smaller or larger numbers of populations see supplementary fig 3. c marker gene expression in the 4-population model.we then plotted the expression of the top 50 genes that decrease with neutrotime and the top 50 genes that increase with neutrotime (fig 3b).not all genes changed in a uniform direction over neutrotime; some such as retnlg encoding resistin-like gamma precursor mmp8 and mmp9 encoding the matrix metalloproteinases 8 and 9 and mcemp1 encoding mast cell expressed membrane protein 1 peaked between the poles of neutrotime (fig 3c).1 0 0.5 relative expression a d f e b neutrotime correlation correlated not correlated c neutrotime 0 0.5 1 0 0.5 1 0 0.5 1 0 0.5 1 relative gene expression 0.25 0.50 0.75 camp ltf mmp8 retnlg mmp9 mcemp1 0.25 0.50 0.75 csf3r il1b 0 1 2 3 −2 −1 0 1 2 normalized enrichment score ranked gene sets −log10(fdr_q_val) −log10(fdr_q_val) 0 1 2 3 0 2500 5000 7500 10000 hoffmann_large_to_small_pre_bii_lymphocyte_up kamikubo_myeloid_cebpa_network cairo_liver_development_dn markey_rb1_acute_lof_up gse34205_healthy_vs_rsv_inf_infant_pbmc_dn go_specific_granule gse13547_ctrl_vs_anti_igm_stim_zfx_ko_bcell_2h_up go_tertiary_granule mori_immature_b_lymphocyte_dn go_humoral_immune_response gse6269_e_coli_vs_strep_pneumo_inf_pbmc_dn rhodes_undifferentiated_cancer chyla_cbfa2t3_targets_dn go_electron_transport_chain whiteford_pediatric_cancer_markers pujana_chek2_pcc_network go_electron_transfer_activity zhong_secretome_of_lung_cancer_and_endothelium go_antimicrobial_humoral_response croonquist_il6_deprivation_dn mori_pre_bi_lymphocyte_up ly_aging_old_dn hallmark_g2m_checkpoint go_oxidative_phosphorylation kobayashi_egfr_signaling_24hr_dn go_defense_response_ to_gram_positive_b acterium rosty_cervical_cancer_proliferation_cluster croonquist_nras_signaling_dn reactome_the_citric_acid_tca_cycle_and_respiratory_electron_transport andersen_cholangiocarcinoma_class2 rhein_all_glucocorticoid_therapy_dn hallmark_coagulation hallmark_e2f_targets hallmark_interferon_alpha_response hallmark_tnfa_signaling_via_nfkb hoebeke_lymphoid_stem_cell_dn pid_il6_7_pathway wong_adult_tissue_stem_module pid_atf2_pathway chen_lvad_support_of_failing_heart_up taxcreb_01 onder_cdh1_targets_2_up onder_cdh1_targets_1_up phong_tnf_targets_up −2 −1 0 1 2 < 0.00005normalized enrichment score 0.01 q (false discovery rate) fdr < 0.01 not significant fdr < 0.01 n = 44 (046 %) not significant n = 9521 (9954 %) lyz2 ngp wfdc21 camp ifitm6 lcn2 ltf arhgdib mmp8 anxa1 prdx5 pglyrp1 cybb ly6c2 chil3 dstn cd177 pfn1 lgals3 ly6g retnlg adpgk mgst1 mt-co1 serpinb1a tkt aldh2 capg lamtor4 hmgn2 cd24a aa467197 cebpe scp2 stmn1 plaur mt-co3 tecr h2afz sri mcemp1 mmp9 tmsb10 mt-atp6 cd63 mt-co2 ltb4r1 chil1 limd2 ube2c cdk2ap2 gm5150 alyref2 gm4799 igfbp6 map1lc3b per2 sirpb1b ly6a gm9843 tpd52 h2-q10 taldo1 rps27rt selplg b2m ubb gm2a pla2g7 slpi marcks rpl41 cebpb fgl2 lst1 junb ifitm1 hbb-bt jund rps9 ccl6 dusp1 csf3r h2-d1 hba-a2 ftl1 wfdc17 fau fth1 hba-a1 tyrobp srgn msrb1 btg1 ifitm2 malat1 rps27 fxyd5 hbb-bs il1b 0 1 2 3 −0.5 0.0 0.5 mean expression fig 3 gene expression along neutrotime.gene set enrichment analysis (gsea) similarly indicated enrichment of granule loading with early neutrotime and effector processes with late neutrotime (fig 3d–f).interestingly neutrotime- defined maturation was prominently associated with a gsea signature for type i interferon response (fig 3f).we first selected genes profiled in fig 3a (spearman correlation).significantly enriched genes were sorted by the absolute value of the normalized enrichment score and colored by the false discovery rate (fig 3f).scrna-seq studies were performed two times for healthy tissues (shown in fig 1–6 and supplementary fig 3 5–9) and once for neutrophils in experimental inﬂammation (shown in fig 7–8 and supplementary fig 10).figure 3a–c: descriptive analysis.figure 3d–f: gene set enrichment analysis as previously described.76 in short a normalized enrichment score was calculated by going through a list of genes based on their spearman correlation with neutrotime as a pre-ranked list and calculating a running-sum statistic which was then normalized for differences in the sizes of the gene sets that were looked at (normalized enrichment score).]
Patterns of gene expression correlation with neutrotime, highlighting positively and negatively correlated genes, and enrichment of granule loading and effector processes with neutrotime maturation.

Text 594
10.1186/S13073-021-00906-X
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 3 single-cell characterization of the pro-tumor features of marco+ macrophages. a the mesenchymal signature primarily originates from the macrophage population. b single-cell expression analysis from paired macrophages and tumor cells from the same samples. the mean marco expression within macrophages significantly correlates with mesenchymal subtype score and anti-correlates with proneural subtype score in paired tumor cells. : p < 0.05; : p < 0.01; ns: not significant. c marco+ macrophages demonstrate an enrichment in gene sets related to the epithelial-mesenchymal transition. d the hypoxia pathway is also enriched in marco+ macrophages. e this corroborates with their presence in the tumor core rather than the tumor periphery in 4 pairs of locationally separated samples in darmanis et al. (black lines in the swarm plots represent means). f pathways least expressed by marco+ macrophages include interferon-alpha response as well as mhc ii antigen presentation (g). h out of all genes surveyed, marco expression is distinctly associated with decreased hla class ii gene expression']. Reference sentences:[genome medicine (2021) 13:88 page 5 of 13 in the macrophage population rather than in tumor cells (p < 0.00001 n = 50 patients mann-whitney u test fig 3a additional file 3: fig s8 additional file 2: table s3) and specifically within marco-expressing macro- phages (p = 0.005).marco mean expression in macro- phage cells also significantly correlated with the mesenchymal signature score in tumor cells from the same sample (p = 0.0084 n = 41 patients spearman cor- relation; see the “methods” section; fig 3b) while antic- orrelating with the proneural signature (p = 0.047).out of the 50 hallmark gene sets from msigdb the gene sets with the highest enrich- ment scores among marco+ macrophages were epithelial-mesenchymal transition angiogenesis glycoly- sis and hypoxia (fdr q < 0.001 for all four permutation test on phenotypes with default weighting n = 17132 cells; fig 3c d).macrophages from the tumor core had higher marco expression than those taken from the tumor periphery (p < 0.001 n = 1846 cells; mann-whitney u test; fig 3e).genome medicine (2021) 13:88 page 7 of 13 inflammatory: interferon alpha response interferon gamma response allograft rejection and tnfa signaling via nfkb (fdr q ≤ 0.001 for all four sets n = 17132 cells fig 3f).accordingly the go gene set antigen processing and presentation of peptide or polysaccharide antigen via mhc class ii was highly downregulated in marco+ macrophages (p < 0.001 n = 17132 cells fig 3g).similarly by comparing the differential expression of hla class ii genes in relation to all 17496 other assayed genes marco was one of the three most negatively associated (fig 3h) alongside bnip3 (an apoptotic bcl-2 family gene) and vcan (an extracel- lular protein implicated in metastasis [48]).]
Correlation between marco expression in macrophages and mesenchymal subtype score in tumor cells, enriched in epithelial-mesenchymal transition and hypoxia pathways.

Text 595
10.1186/S13073-021-00906-X
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 5 marco+ macrophages are recruited from the blood likely via tumor signaling pathways. a assessment of bmdm versus microglia gene sets reveals that the marco+ macrophage population is more similar to bmdms (b). c single-cell expression from paired macrophage-tumor cells from the same samples reveals that the mean marco expression within macrophages correlates with the expression score of a chemoattraction signature in tumors']. Reference sentences:[based on the gene sets associated with bmdms versus resident micro- glia [17] we found that marco+ macrophages more closely resembled bmdms (p < 0.0001 n = 71 subpopu- lations; mann-whitney u test; fig 5a b).we found a significant positive correl- ation of marco mean expression in macrophage cells with the corresponding normalized expression of these recruitment factors in tumor cells from the same sample (p = 0.008 n = 41 patients spearman correlation; see the “methods” section; fig 5c).]
Patterns of correlation between marco expression in macrophages and chemoattraction signature expression in tumors.

Text 596
10.1016/j.cell.2021.04.028
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 5. reference tissue and organoid atlases reveal epithelial progenitor and stem cell states during small intestine development (a) integrated umap of thio, developing, and adult duodenum epithelial scrna-seq datasets, colored by cell type (left) and source (right). (b) hierarchical clustering of average transcriptome correlations between cell types of different tissue sources. (c) inset of the 3d umap, highlighting stem cells colored by cell type (left), source (center), and stem cell score (right). (d) boxplots showing the spearman’s correlation distribution of thio stem cells compared with developing or adult stem cells (wilcoxon rank-sum test, nominal p < 0.0001). (e) schematic of scrna-seq experiments performed over a time course of in vitro hio development. spring embedding is colored by cell class and shaded by cluster assignment. (f) hio time course umap colored by time point or marker gene expression. light purple indicates intestinal epithelial cells. (g) in vitro hio, developing, and adult duodenum stem cells ordered by isc state and colored by phase. hierarchical clustering of isc cell bins represents transcriptome distance calculated with isc development-associated genes. the heatmap shows gene expression changes of signaling pathways during isc phase transitions.']. Reference sentences:[in an integrated uniform manifold approximation and projection (umap) we found that developing duodenum and thio stem cell-to-enterocyte differentiation trajectories were distinct from the adult (figure 5a).next we analyzed sc transcriptomes across an hio time course from endoderm induction through 30 days of in vitro dif- ferentiation to illuminate the early molecular transitions that lead to intestinal stem cell (isc) specification (figure 5e).next we reconstructed an isc maturation roadmap from plu- ripotency (figure 5g).isc phases 4–6 figure 5.developing human duodenum and thio epithelial stem cells are distinct from the adult state related to figure 5 a) umap embedding of the developing duodenum and b) adult duodenum epithelial cells colored and numbered by annotated cell type.mouse gastrulation map enables assessment of cell composition of in vitro hio time course data related to figure 5 a) heatmap showing relative expression levels of top 50 cluster markers across each hio time course cluster.f) in vitro hio time course bi-potent cluster (c9 of hio time course in figure 5e) and clusters in the mesenchymal trajectory (c5 c3 c10 c1 and c8) were extracted (top left clusters from original spring embedding are highlighted) and projected to a new umap embedding to visualize mesenchymal cell developmental trajectories.h) umap embedding of in vitro hio time course mesenchymal progenitor/ mesenchymal cells (c1358910 from figure 5e) with cells colored by cell type assignment.]
Patterns related to correlation between stem cells in different developmental stages and tissue sources were analyzed in single-cell transcriptomics data.

Text 597
10.1016/j.celrep.2021.109229
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 2. bulk tissue gene expression profiling of the epileptic hippocampal area ca1 reveals regionalized transcriptional response (a) representative laser capture microdissection (lcm) sampling of the sup ca1 sublayer. scale bar, 100 mm. (b) heatmaps of degs in deep (left) and sup ca1 sublayers (right) in three replicates from control (c) and epileptic (e) rats (fc > 0.5, adj. p < 0.01). arrowheads point to bona fide gene markers of sup (calb1, grm1, and syt17) and deep (ndst4 and nr4a2) pyramidal neurons. note the presence of gene markers for interneurons (e.g., vip, sst, sema3c, and kit) and oligodendrocytes (plp1, mbp, mobp, mal, enpp2, cldn11, and ermn). (c) scatterplot of degs between sup and deep ca1 sublayers in control or epileptic rats (fc > 0.5, adj. p < 0.01). bona fide gene markers of sup (calb1, grm1, and syt17) and deep (ndst4, nr4a2, and col11a1) pyramidal neurons are highlighted (black text and bold font). also shown are marker genes for interneurons (sst, vip, and kit), oligodendrocytes (mbp, mobp, and plp1), astrocytes (aqp4 and gja1), and microglia (tgfbr1). note the presence of a subset of uncorrelated transcripts, including canonical markers of microglia cells (trem2, irf8, fcgr2b, and cd68), at the sup sublayer in epileptic rats (red). mle, maximum-likelihood estimate. (d) ma plots showing epilepsy-associated significantly upregulated (red) and downregulated (blue) genes in deep and sup ca1 sublayers (fc > 0.5, adj. p < 0.01) (left). venn diagrams show the overlap of upregulated (top) and downregulated (bottom) genes between epileptic and control in sup and deep sublayers of ca1. (e) go analysis of the top 250 upregulated and downregulated genes in deep and sup sublayers in epilepsy (adj. p < 0.1 and then ranked by fc).']. Reference sentences:[p < 0.01; figure 2b; superficial versus deep samples).p < 0.01; figure 2c red dots; see figure s2f for less stringent criteria: adj.p < 0.01; figure 2d).overall we retrieved more upregulated than downregulated genes particularly in the superficial (73% degs) versus the deep sublayer (57% degs) (figure 2d venn diagrams on the right).functional enrichment analyses of these gene sets of equal size also revealed marked differences (figure 2e).p < 0.05) linked to neuronal pro- cesses such as synaptic transmission and neuron projection including many well-known modulators of epileptogenic pro- cess such as cacnb1 cacnb4 cacng2 kcnq3 kcnab1 scn4b grin2a nptn and gria4 (winden et al. 2015) (figure 2e).most of these gene ontology (go) terms were significantly en- riched only in the superficial ca1 sublayer (figure 2e).strikingly significantly upregulated transcripts in the superficial sublayer of epileptic ca1 show a strong functional association with immune and inﬂammatory re- sponses including cytokine production cell migration cell pro- liferation and programmed cell death (e.g. tlr3 tlr7 c1qa csf1r tgfb1 cd74 cd86 itgax itgam itgb2 casp1 casp4 nlrc4 pycard and tnfrsf1b) (figure 2e).we further confirmed these findings us- ing a different scrna-seq dataset from the allen brain map portal figure 2.we found significantly larger transcriptional changes of go terms associated with immune and inﬂammatory pro- cesses cytokine production and programmed cell death in the superficial sublayer (figure 2).the ca1 cell layer was microdissected with a leica 6000 laser microdissector through a 40x non-oil immersion objective to obtain cell bodies of superficial and deep sublayers separately (figure 2a).]
Patterns of gene expression correlation between superficial and deep sublayers in epileptic rats, with distinct markers for different cell types.

Text 598
10.1038/s41467-021-24110-y
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 7 mesenchymal fibroblasts are increased in scleroderma. a umap visualization of dermal skin cell populations of patients with scleroderma (data from ncbi gene expression omnibus (gse160536)) in the left panel, and a normal scar (ns3) sample from our data is showed on the right. b integration analysis of two sources of fibroblasts, one from scleroderma, and the other one from a normal scar. c divided umap visualization of the integration results. d feature plots of the expression distribution of mesenchymal signature genes in scleroderma and normal scar fibroblasts. e correlation analysis of the average expression level of cluster 7 cells (scleroderma) and four types of fibroblasts from keloid samples. f immunoﬂuorescence staining of nrep and adam12 in normal and scleroderma tissues. arrowheads indicate nrep+/adam12+ cells. scale bar = 200 μm. g percentage of nrep+/adam12+ cells in normal and scleroderma tissues. data are presented as mean values ± sd (n = 5 images examined over 3 independent experiments). two-sided unpaired t-test, p = 0.00013.']. Reference sentences:[furthermore mesenchymal progenitor marker genes such as postn and col11a1 primarily occupied the upper space (fig 6c and sup- plementary fig 7a).sc4 fibroblasts constituted the vast majority of the “pre-branch” and path2 and sc1 fibroblasts constituted the majority of path3 and 4 (fig 6d and supplementary fig 7b).the expression of sox4 and jun maintained high levels in path2 and the expression of id2 and carhsp1 maintained high levels in path34 (supplementary fig 7f).we performed unsupervised clus- tering on all scleroderma and normal scar fibroblasts and observed heterogeneity with 9 subclusters (fig 7a b).we found that cluster 7 was increased in scleroderma compared to normal scar (fig 7c).mesenchymal fibroblast markers postn adam12 comp and nrep were extensively expressed in scleroderma cluster 7 fibroblasts (fig 7d).correlation analysis also suggested that scleroderma cluster 7 fibroblasts were most analogous to mesenchymal fibroblasts in keloid (fig 7e).significantly we also found increasing mesenchymal fibroblast subpopulation in scleroderma (fig 7c–g) another fibrotic skin disease suggesting that this may be a universal mechanism in skin fibrosis.by analyzing single-cell data from scleroderma34 we also found an increased mesenchymal fibro- blast subpopulation highly expressing postn comp aspn and so on in fibrosis tissues compared to normal tissues (fig 7d).]
Correlation patterns between mesenchymal fibroblasts in scleroderma and keloid samples.

Text 599
10.1038/s41421-021-00266-1
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 5 aec and sec contribute different molecules to wt and tet2−/− hsc niche. a, b the degs of aecs vs secs in wt (a) and tet2−/− (b) fetal livers by merfish. the horizontal dotted line represents an adjusted p value = 0.05 using a wilcoxon rank-sum test with false discovery rate correction. the vertical lines represent a fold change = 2. blue dots are notch pathway genes, red dots are wnt pathway genes, green dots are niche factors, purple dots are vasculature genes, and black dots are other genes. all the labeled dots are reproducible significant genes. c, d correlation coefficients of niche genes with cell type markers in wt (c) and tet2−/− (d) hsc niches. the genes listed in c and d all showed significant correlations (r > 0.1, p < 0.05) with the corresponding cell type markers (dark blue = aec, yellow = sec, light blue = hepatocyte, green = macrophage, pink = megakaryocyte). the p values were corrected using false discovery rate.']. Reference sentences:[to further identify the specific roles of aecs and secs we first analyzed their degs (fig 5a b).to explore the co-expression of various niche factors among cells within hsc niches we calculated the correlation coefficients of pairs of genes co- expressed in the same hsc niche cells in the wt (fig 5c) and tet2−/− (fig 5d) fetal livers using the merfish data.in contrast niche genes tgfb2 il7r pdpn meis1 mpl ephb4 eng and tet1 and wnt and notch signaling genes prickle2 dll1 rbpj and notch4 were correlated with sec but not aec marker genes (fig 5c).cell discovery (2021) 7:47 page 8 of 17 ndn egfr gfap tet2 and angpt1 and wnt and notch signaling genes sfrp1 notch3 fzd1 sfrp2 fzd2 vangl2 notch2 tcf7l1 fzd7 tcf7l2 fzd4 fbxw7 fzd8 and rbpj were correlated with aec marker genes; niche gene pdpn and notch signaling genes dll4 and jag2 were correlated with sec marker genes (fig 5d).for example in wt hsc niches egfr notch2 and fzd2 were co-expressed with hepatocyte marker genes; fgf1 cdh5 efnb2 bmp2 bmp7 and tcf7 were co- expressed with macrophage marker genes; and il6 nkd2 pecam1 lef1 and ndn were co-expressed with mega- karyocyte marker genes (fig 5c).in tet2−/− hsc niches kitl egr1 dkk3 bmp7 tcf7 icam1 and fzd3 were co- expressed with hepatocyte marker genes; jag1 lef1 dkk2 prickle2 dll1 notch4 maml1 tgfb2 and eng were co-expressed with megakaryocyte marker genes (fig 5d).interestingly dll4 is associated with aecs in wt niche (fig 5c) but with secs in tet2−/− niche (fig 5d).fzd1 which is associated with aecs but not with secs (fig 5c d) is a specific receptor of wnt3a which is known to be particularly important for regulating hsc fate5960.the displayed correlation coefficients for wt and tet2−/− niche (fig 5c d) were derived from the niche cells from all biological replicates.]
Patterns of correlation between niche genes and cell type markers in hsc niches, with specific genes associated with aecs or secs.

Text 600
10.1038/s41467-021-24386-0
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 2 spatial transcriptional heterogeneity in ctcs. a t-sne plot of ctcs from ten patients reveals their interpatient heterogeneity. b pearson correlation analysis showing cell-to-cell variability for ctcs drawn from four vascular sites in patient p9 (upper panel) and five patients combined (lower panel). the twosided wilcox test was used. data are presented using box and whisker plot (median, lower quartile, upper quartile, minimum, and maximum values). n = 45 cells in hv; n = 12 cells in pa; n = 40 cells in pv; n = 16 cells in pov. p < 0.01, p < 0.001. exact p values in upper panel: hv vs pa, p = 1.18 × 10−9; pa vs pv, p = 2.79 × 10−4; hv vs pv, p = 2.36 × 10−4. exact p values in lower panel: hv vs pa, p = 2.32 × 10−3; pa vs pv, p = 7.00 × 10−4; pv vs pov, p = 1.50 × 10−5; hv vs pov, p = 6.13 × 10−3. bar = median, box plot = quartiles. c pseudotemporal kinetics of ctcs in patients p9. d bubble chart presenting the molecular pathways enriched in ctcs from each vascular sites. hypergeometric test was used to test whether degs were overlapped with the gene sets. the benjamini–hochberg fdr-controlling method for multiple hypothesis testing were performed.']. Reference sentences:[initially we found ctcs that isolated from different vascular compartments strongly clustered by the origin of patients indicating that interpatient heterogeneity is higher than intervascular compart- ment heterogeneity (fig 2a and supplementary fig 2a).a remarkably heterogeneous ctc population was identified in the liver-efferent hv while ctcs from post-pulmonary pa exhibited significantly decreased heterogeneity (fig 2b p < 0.001).surprisingly intercellular transcriptional heterogeneity significantly increased again in the pv and pov (fig 2b p < 0.001).the pattern of spatial heterogeneity of ctcs observed in p9 was further confirmed in other five patients with at least three ctcs detected in two or more vascular sites (fig 2b).moreover pseudotemporal kinetics of ctcs from the hv to the pv through the pa also depicted the anatomical blood ﬂow pathway of disseminating hcc cells (fig 2c supplementary fig 2b–d and “methods”).the four vascular site-specific expression profiles of ctcs were enriched for genes related to oxidative phosphorylation/xenobiotic metabolism (hv) gpcr signaling (pa) immune response/cytokine production (pv) and cell cycle (pov) respectively (fig 2d).]
Spatial heterogeneity of ctcs across different vascular sites, with higher interpatient than intervascular variability, and enriched molecular pathways specific to each site.

Text 601
10.1038/s41588-021-00894-z
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 5 | multi-omic oligodendrocyte trajectory analysis. a, umap dimensionality reduction of oligodendrocytes from the integrated snatac-seq (n=58,221 nuclei) and snrna-seq (n=36,773 nuclei) analysis. each cell is colored by its pseudotime trajectory assignment. b, scatterplot showing the proportion of oligodendrocyte nuclei from ad samples at 50 evenly sized bins across the trajectory. the black line shows a linear regression, and the gray outline represents the 95% ci. pearson correlation coefficient and p value from two-sided test are shown. c, scatterplot of module scores for nf-odc, mf-odc and mature odc gene signatures36,37 (see supplementary note for full gene lists) averaged for nuclei in each of the 50 trajectory bins. solid colored lines represent loess regressions for each signature, and the gray outlines represent 95% cis. d, left: heatmap of chromatin accessibility at 9,231 oligodendrocyte gl-ccres reconstructed using rvae. right: heatmap of gene expression for 1,563 oligodendrocyte t-degs reconstructed using rvae. annotated genes are degs in oligodendrocytes, with respect to other cell types, or ad upregulated genes in oligodendrocytes. e, 2d latent space learned by rvae modeling of oligodendrocyte t-degs (left) and gl-ccres (right), where each dot represents one gene. left: genes colored by trajectory rank, the point in the trajectory where the gene reaches 75% of max expression. right: genes colored by correlation of rvae reconstructed expression with ad diagnosis proportion as in b. f, oligodendrocyte t-deg latent space colored by correlation of reconstructed gene expression to nrf1 (left) and srebf1 (right) motif variability. the shape of each point represents the regulatory relationship between the tf and each gene, while genes without regulatory evidence are shown as small gray dots. annotated genes are ad upregulated genes in oligodendrocytes (ad degs). tf binding motifs are shown as motif logos.']. Reference sentences:[additionally we confirmed cell-type identities by gene activity and gene expres- sion in a panel of canonical cell-type marker genes (supplementary fig 3) and used seurat’s label-transfer algorithm to verify cell-type annotations in the snatac-seq dataset using the snrna-seq data- set as a reference (supplementary fig 5).for a given tf we identified candidate target genes as those whose promoters or linked ccres are accessible and con- tain the tf’s binding motif in the cell type of interest and we repeated this for several select tfs generating microglia-specific and oligodendrocyte-specific tf regulatory networks (fig 4gh extended data fig 5b and supplementary note).we constructed an integrated oligodendrocyte trajectory using 58221 nuclei from snatac-seq and 36773 nuclei from snrna-seq (fig 5a) noting that the proportion of nuclei from late-stage ad samples appeared to increase along the trajectory (fig 5b; pearson correlation r = 0.32 p value = 0.022).to clarify the func- tional state of oligodendrocytes associated with late-stage ad we examined the gene expression signatures3637 of newly formed oligodendrocytes (nf-odcs) myelin-forming oligodendrocytes (mf-odcs) and mature oligodendrocytes (mature odcs; fig 5c; see supplementary note for gene signature lists).chromatin accessibility of 9231 oligodendrocyte gl-ccres and gene expression of 1563 oligodendrocyte t-degs reconstructed with a rvae showcases the vast amount of chro- matin remodeling and transcriptional reprogramming that may underlie oligodendrocyte maturation (fig 5d).additionally the latent feature space (z) learned by the rvae provides further biological insight into the pseudotime trajec- tory and gene regulation in disease (fig 5e).we then correlated the reconstructed feature trajectories as in fig 5d to the proportion of late-stage ad nuclei as in fig 5b to see which features con- sistently changed with ad.we correlated tf motif variability trajectories (extended data fig 6) with the reconstructed t-deg expression trajectories and visualized the correlation between the tf and each gene within the 2d latent space identifying candidate target genes activated or repressed by tf binding events (positive or negative trajectory cor- relation respectively; fig 5f and supplementary note).b scatterplot of the proportion of ad microglia nuclei as in fig 5b.c scatterplot of module scores as in fig 5c for gene signatures from keren-shaul et al.40: homeostatic microglia stage 1 dam and stage 2 dam (see supplementary note for full gene lists).d heatmaps of rvae reconstructed chromatin accessibility and gene expression as in fig 5d for 9163 microglia gl-ccres (left) and 2138 microglia t-degs (right).e 2d latent space learned by rvae modeling of microglia t-degs (left) and gl-ccres (right) as in fig 5e.f microglia t-deg latent space colored by correlation of gene expression to spi1 (left) and etv5 (right) motif variability as in fig 5f.]
Patterns related to correlation between gene expression and Alzheimer's disease progression in oligodendrocytes.

Text 602
10.1038/s41588-021-00894-z
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 6 | multi-omic microglia and astrocyte trajectory analyses. a, umap dimensionality reduction of microglia from the integrated snatac-seq (n=10,768 nuclei) and snrna-seq (n=4,119 nuclei) analysis. b, scatterplot of the proportion of ad microglia nuclei as in fig 5b. c, scatterplot of module scores as in fig 5c for gene signatures from keren-shaul et al.40: homeostatic microglia, stage 1 dam and stage 2 dam (see supplementary note for full gene lists). d, heatmaps of rvae reconstructed chromatin accessibility and gene expression as in fig 5d, for 9,163 microglia gl-ccres (left) and 2,138 microglia t-degs (right). e, 2d latent space learned by rvae modeling of microglia t-degs (left) and gl-ccres (right), as in fig 5e. f, microglia t-deg latent space colored by correlation of gene expression to spi1 (left) and etv5 (right) motif variability, as in fig 5f. g, umap dimensionality reduction of astrocytes from the integrated snatac-seq (n=12,112 nuclei) and snrna-seq (n=4,704 nuclei) analysis. h, scatterplot of the proportion of ad astrocyte nuclei as in b. i, scatterplot of module scores as in c for gene signatures from habib et al.29: gfap-low, gfap-high and daas (see supplementary note for full gene lists). j, heatmaps of rvae reconstructed chromatin accessibility and gene expression as in d for 12,487 astrocyte gl-ccres (left) and 1,797 astrocyte t-degs (right). k, 2d latent space learned by rvae modeling of astrocyte t-degs (left) and gl-ccres (right), as in e. l, astrocyte t-deg latent space colored by correlation of gene expression to ctcf (left) and etv5 (right) motif variability, as in f.']. Reference sentences:[in both snatac-seq and snrna-seq we discovered multiple neuronal and glial subpopulations and we annotated the subpopulations from snrna-seq based on previ- ously identified marker genes14 (fig 2 supplementary fig 6 and 7 and supplementary note).for our snatac-seq clusters we used seurat’s label-transfer algorithm to calculate cluster prediction scores allowing for supervised annotation of our cell clusters in which we mapped ex.a to ex1 and asc.b to asc2 for example (supplementary fig 6 and 7).for each cell type we identified genes that were differentially expressed along the trajectory (t-degs; supplementary data 7) and used these genes as features to train the rvae until the loss function converged (supplementary note and extended data fig 6).we correlated tf motif variability trajectories (extended data fig 6) with the reconstructed t-deg expression trajectories and visualized the correlation between the tf and each gene within the 2d latent space identifying candidate target genes activated or repressed by tf binding events (positive or negative trajectory cor- relation respectively; fig 5f and supplementary note).using the same analytical approach as that used for our oligoden- drocyte trajectory analysis we constructed an integrated microglia trajectory using 10768 nuclei from snatac-seq and 4119 nuclei from snrna-seq (fig 6a).the proportion of nuclei from late-stage ad samples significantly increased throughout the microglia tra- jectory (fig 6b; pearson correlation r = 0.53 p value = 6.9 × 10−5).to further dissect the microglia trajectory we modeled the chro- matin accessibility and gene expression dynamics of 9163 microg- lia gl-ccres and 2138 microglia t-degs respectively using rvae (fig 6de).we highlight two ets family tfs spi1 and ets vari- ant 5 (etv5) both of which showed upregulated motif variability in late-stage ad (bonferroni-adjusted p values 1.19 × 10−20 and 6.68 × 10−19 respectively) and their candidate target genes along the trajectory (fig 6f and supplementary note).we also constructed an integrated astrocyte trajectory using 12112 nuclei from snatac-seq and 4704 nuclei from snrna-seq (fig 6g) and we again found that the proportion of late-stage ad nuclei significantly increased throughout the trajectory (fig 6h; pearson correlation r = 0.57 p value = 1.9 × 10−5).based on daa gene signature analysis we reasoned that this trajectory fol- lows a trend from a gfap-low state to gfap-high and daa-like states (fig 6i; see supplementary note for gene signature lists).rvae modeling of 12487 astrocyte gl-ccres and 1797 astro- cyte t-degs revealed rich gene-regulatory dynamics across the trajectory (fig 6jk).ctcf is known as a master chromatin regulator4142 and we observed that the ctcf motif variability trajectory was anti-correlated with the daa and gfap-high signatures (end of the trajectory; extended data fig 6) and positively correlated with t-degs in the gfap-low phase of the trajectory (fig 6l).alternatively we found a positive correla- tion between the motif variability trajectory of fosl2 with the gfap-high and daa gene signatures and a positive correlation with genes at the end of the trajectory (fig 6l and supplementary note).]
Summary: Correlation of gene expression to transcription factor motif variability trajectories in microglia and astrocyte single-cell trajectories.

Text 603
10.1038/s41588-021-00894-z
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 8 | robust gene expression modules revealed using integrated bulk and single-cell coexpression network analysis. a, coexpression plots for modules om1, om2, om4 and om5. b, signed correlation oligodendrocyte coexpression modules with ad diagnosis. c, enrichment of srebf1 target genes in oligodendrocyte coexpression modules. d, boxplots showing rna (top) and protein expression59 (bottom; n=98 controls, 76 early pathology and 101 late pathology) of the targets of srebf1 with ad pathological staging. two-sided wilcoxon test. e, boxplots showing quantification of srebf1 puncta per mog+ oligodendrocyte; n=3 cognitively healthy controls, 5 late-stage ad. data are represented as the mean of four equally sized regions per sample. linear mixed-effects model. f, boxplots showing quantification of acsl4 puncta per mog+ oligodendrocyte; n=4 cognitively healthy controls, 4 late-stage ad. data are represented as the mean of four equally sized regions per sample. linear mixed-effects model. g, representative rna fish (rnascope) images from postmortem human brain tissue for combined srebf1 and mog staining as in e (left) and acsl4 and mog staining as in f (right) with dapi nuclear counterstain. for box-and-whisker plots, the box boundaries and line correspond to the iqr and median, respectively. whiskers extend to the lowest or highest data points that are no further than 1.5 times the iqr from the box boundaries.']. Reference sentences:[we reprocessed published ad snrna-seq data from mathys et al.5 and used inmf to integrate these with our snrna-seq data (methods and extended data fig 8).we specifically highlight our scwgcna analysis for oligoden- drocytes; we found four coexpression modules significantly corre- lated with ad diagnosis—om1 om2 om4 and om5 (fig 8ab and supplementary data 7).notably we found that three of the oligodendrocyte modules were signifi- cantly enriched for targets of srebf1 indicating the importance of srebf1 in regulating gene expression in these modules (fig 8c).additionally we found module eigengene expression of srebf1 targets downregulated in early-stage and late-stage ad samples at the level of proteins59 and rna (fig 8d) corroborated by downregulation of srebf1 motif variability in snatac-seq data (extended data fig 4).we also validated the downregula- tion of srebf1 in late-stage ad through rna in situ hybridiza- tion and immunohistochemistry and found a decrease in acsl4 expression one of srebf1’s targets identified in encode chip– seq data in late-stage ad (fig 8e–g and extended data fig 7).]
Patterns of correlation between gene modules and AD diagnosis in oligodendrocytes, enriched for srebf1 targets, downregulated in late-stage AD.

Text 604
10.1038/s41467-021-24730-4
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 4 phenotypic convergence of in vitro stimulated reactive t cells from peripheral blood and ex vivo t cells from the respiratory tract of severely diseased patients. a top panels: umaps of previously analyzed peripheral blood (pb) t cells and t cells from tracheal aspirates (ta) of the same (patient gt_3) and additional patients with severe disease (munich cohort) as well as from bronchoalveolar lavage ﬂuid (balf) from patients with mild disease, severe disease and healthy donors (chua et al.47—berlin cohort; grant et al.49—chicago cohort; liao et al.48—shenzhen cohort); bottom panels (from left to right): cd4 or cd8 (proliferating or not) cell types, reactive pb t cells from stimulated or unstimulated conditions (see previous figures), ifng-positive antigen-“reactive” leiden cluster 29 cells (see fig 1b), louvain clusters (n = 30,033 t cells from 28 patients). b hierarchical clustering of cell types and louvain clusters based on “one minus pearson” correlations of deviations from baseline compositions for each cell type across louvain clusters. pb, peripheral blood t cells. cohort names (munich, chicago, berlin, shenzhen) refer to respiratory tract t cells. fractions of cd4 or cd8 t cells in pbmcs or respiratory materials (supplementary fig 12) served as input compositions. c fractions of louvain cluster 11 or ccl4 expressing cells among (from left to right and top to bottom) pb cd4 t cells, respiratory cd4 t cells, pb cd8 t cells, or respiratory cd8 t cells. for respiratory t cells, data for individual patients with indicated disease stages are shown (represented by dots; n = 2 healthy, n = 3 mild, n = 11 severe-cold, n = 10 severe-hot; patients with <20 cells in louvain cluster 11 were excluded from analysis).']. Reference sentences:[we also explored all clonotypes defined by unique double (cdr3αβ) or single (cdr3α or cdr3β) chain sequences (supplementary fig 4).upon further examination these single-chain (cdr3β only) clonotypes shared cdr3β sequences with clonotypes 81 and 244 respectively and showed similar ifng upregulation (supplementary fig 4a) and global transcriptomic states ex vivo and upon stimulation (supplementary fig 4b) compared to their paired partner clonotypes.we also identified an additional single- chain cd4 clonotype (clonotype 136) for which no paired partner clonotype existed (supplementary fig 4c).while for cd8 t cells no clonotype-dependent enrichment was visible after stimulation in the cytotoxicity score (early activation) in the cytokine scores (late activation) we detected broad statistically significant signals which did not mirror global transcriptomic shifts in sanity checks and therefore seemed to reﬂect rather unspecific changes (e.g. compare statistically significant results for clonotype 13 in supplementary fig 4a with missing reactivity in fig 1e).in cd4 t cells clonotype and stimulation-dependent ifn responses (early activation) likewise yielded inconsistent results (supplementary fig 4c) whereas the proliferation score (late activation) identified the same antigen-reactive clonotypes as defined through ifng upregulation except for one clonotype which was missed by the proliferation score (supplementary fig 4c).a smaller group contained almost exclusively cd4 and cd8 clonotypes that we defined as antigen-reactive based on statistically significant ifng upregulation (supplementary fig 4) and/or were present in the stimulation-induced cluster 29 (fig 1b).stimulated cd4 or cd8 t cells from pb clustered in distinct niches that also contained respiratory t cells from severely diseased patients (fig 4a).leiden cluster 29 t cells (fig 1b) were also enriched in this area (fig 4a).we next analyzed the relative distribution of each cell type across louvain clusters (fig 4b).based on the dominance of stimulated or unperturbed cd4 or cd8 clonotypes we predicted louvain clusters to be hot or cold cd4 or cd8 clusters with cluster 11 being a generally “hot t” cluster and for example the areas around clusters 5 and 13 reﬂecting “cold” cd4 and cd8 environments respectively (fig 4a b).in contrast stimulation-induced t cell signatures of reactive clonotypes were associated with “hot” respiratory environments from severely diseased virus-positive patients as most prominently visible for louvain cluster 11 (fig 4c).the prediction pattern of the additional top-predicted ligands also coincided with the other hot or cold louvain cluster regions (fig 4b).for example hot cd8 louvain clusters 2 and 7 (fig 4b) stood out through their high expression of the predicted ligand ccl5 (supplementary fig 13).]
Patterns related to correlation between cell types and clusters based on deviations from baseline compositions were observed, with distinct hot and cold environments identified.

Text 605
10.1038/s41551-021-00770-5
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 4 | generation of intercellular and intracellular signalling networks. a, a model of biological ligand–receptor signalling. ligands expressed in a signalling cell bind and activate receptors on a target cell. subsequent protein–protein signalling triggers activation of transcription factors in the nucleus and expression of target genes. b, reconstruction of a dataset-wide signalling network. scenic is used to estimate transcription-factor gene-regulatory modules, as well as transcription-factor activation scores on a cell-by-cell level. expression levels of receptors are correlated with transcription-factor activation scores across the entire dataset with exclusion of receptors present in the transcription-factor modules. public receptor–ligand databases are then queried to identify ligands capable of activating receptors. c, identification of condition-specific signalling patterns. to identify signalling specific to experimental conditions, the dataset is first split by condition—for example, into pcl- and ecm-treated cells. domino is run on each group of cells to identify a signalling network specific to each condition. d, members of signalling networks represent transcription factors, receptors and ligands that are predicted to be active in a particular condition. e, comparison of network members from each condition identifies transcription factors, receptors and ligands that are predicted to be active in only one of the conditions. f, condition-specific members can be used to identify signalling pathways that are active or are differentially activated in a specific experimental condition.']. Reference sentences:[of the remaining two fibroblast clusters one appeared cartilage-like (fib cart) on the basis of expression of tnmd thbs4 and prg4 and one appeared to be involved in immune regulation (fib immune) on the basis of expression of the cyto- kine genes cxcl14 and ccl11 (fig 3c and extended data fig 4).intercellular communication can be modelled as the result of four biological steps (fig 4a).domino reconstructs cell-communication events in reverse to identify signalling connected with specific changes in transcription-factor activity (fig 4b).the dataset is first split by condition—for example cells from ecm-treated tis- sue and cells from pcl-treated tissue (fig 4c).we then generate a signalling network for each treatment containing all tf r and l pre- dicted to be active in each condition (fig 4d).we compare the two networks to identify members specific to each (fig 4e) identifying tf r and l predicted to be active in only one condition.the network members active in only one condition can then be used to identify signalling pathways that are specific to that condition (fig 4f).]
Patterns related to correlation between receptor expression and transcription factor activation scores across different conditions are shown in the figure.

Text 606
10.1038/s41551-021-00770-5
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 5 | domino identifies biomaterials condition-specific signalling. a, the ecm global signalling network. three modules of receptors and transcription factors are readily apparent and labelled on the basis of enrichment of transcription factors by cluster. b, heat maps of transcription-factor activation score for ecm-specific transcription factors (left) and correlation of transcription-factor activation score with receptor expression (right). transcription factors are binned according to their membership to the fibroblast, tissue or immune modules from the ecm global signalling network. cells are ordered and coloured according to their cluster. receptors found only in the ecm condition are marked with arrows. connections between receptor and transcription factors are marked with an ‘x’ on the correlation heat map. c, example feature plots of gene-expression and activation scores for specific receptor– transcription-factor pairs identified by domino in the ecm condition. d, the pcl global signalling network. three modules of receptors and transcription factors are readily apparent and labelled on the basis of enrichment of transcription factors by cluster. e, heat maps of transcription-factor activation score for pcl-specific transcription factors (left) and correlation of transcription-factor activation score with receptor expression (right). transcription factors are binned according to their membership to the fibroblast, tissue or immune modules from the pcl global signalling network. cells are ordered and coloured according to their cluster. receptors found only in the pcl condition are marked with arrows. connections between receptor and transcription factors are marked with an ‘x’ on the correlation heat map. f, example feature plots of gene-expression and activation scores for specific receptor– transcription-factor pairs identified by domino in the fibrotic (pcl) condition.']. Reference sentences:[eosinophils and neutrophils which comprise a large portion of the cd45+ popula- tion in ecm and pcl respectively (extended data fig 5) were not captured in the single-cell analysis.we then applied domino to the biomaterials atlas to determine global signalling networks for the ecm (fig 5a) and pcl (fig 5d) tissue environments.ecm-specific transcription factors were enriched in fibroblasts tissue-specific cells and immune cells according to their modules as predicted by domino (fig 5b).taken together these pairs of transcription factors and receptors represent a number of signalling pathways that may be specifically activated in response to ecm (fig 5c).we further show activation of sox17 in endothelial cells linked to expression of the receptor gene osmr activated by osm (fig 5c) from myeloid populations (extended data fig 7b).domino also identified a linkage between tgfbr2 and both sox11 and sox4 (fig 5f) in fibroblasts triggered by tgfb1 produced by myeloid populations (extended data fig 7c).b the domino global signaling network for pcl as seen in fig 5.]
Patterns of correlation between receptor expression and transcription-factor activation scores in specific single-cell conditions, revealing potential signaling pathways.

Text 607
10.1016/j.stemcr.2021.07.006
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['figure 3. molecular signatures of ngn2-in compared with primary neuronal cell types mouse reference atlases (a) ngn2-in subpopulation signatures were compared with diverse reference atlases. (b) spatial expression patterns of selected markers as maximum intensity projections across sagittal sections in the embryonic day 13.5 mouse brain from the allen developing mouse brain atlas. (c) transcriptomic similarities between ngn2-ins, other ipsc-derived neurons, and primary neurons represented as pearson correlations between expression profiles. sc, spinal cord. (d) average expression of various marker genes of primary neuron subtypes in ngn2-in clusters and primary mouse pns and cns neuron subtypes. (e) proportions of the estimated cns component in ngn2-ins, cerebral organoid neurons, and human/mouse primary mature pns/cns neurons. (f) expression of exogenous (left) and endogenous (right) ngn2 in different ngn2-in clusters. the boxes show the lower and upper quartiles of the distributions. the bars extend to the min/max or 1.5x interquartile range.']. Reference sentences:[we next compared each ngn2-in cluster with pns and cns neurons from primary reference cell at- lases (clark et al. 2019; la manno et al. 2020; zeisel et al. 2018) (figure 3c).high low figure 3.we deconvoluted the ratio of pns/cns identity for each cluster and found that all ngn2-ins have mixed signatures of cns- and pns-derived neurons without a clearly established identity (figure 3e).the ngn2 expression level and proportion of ngn2-expressing cells was indeed lower in the off-target cluster (cd99+) in line with previous studies that failed re- programming is linked to silenced reprogramming factors (treutlein et al. 2016) (figure 3f).]
Correlation patterns between ngn2-in clusters and primary neuronal cell types, including expression similarities and marker gene distributions.

Text 608
10.1038/s41592-021-01222-3
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 3 | extending scito-seq for compatibility with 60-plex custom and 165-plex commercial antibody panels. a,b, umap projection of 175,930 resolved pbmcs using a panel of 60-plex antibodies colored by leiden clusters (a) and key lineage markers (b). subscripts/prefixes stands for: c, conventional; nc, nonconventional; act, activated and gd, gamma-delta. c,d, umap projection of 175,000 resolved pbmcs using a panel of 165-plex totalseq-c antibodies (tsc 165-plex) colored by leiden clusters (c) and key lineage markers (d). e, distributions of umis per cell (y axis) for ccds with different numbers of cells (1–10) encapsulated for 60-plex (up, n=6,831, 24,031, 42,274, 44,251, 31,805, 16,094, 6,600, 2,437, 1,068, 538) and tsc 165-plex (down, n=7,779, 25,573, 40,949, 42,036, 28,954, 15,411, 6,957, 3,178, 1,859, 2,304) experiments. horizontal lines are medians, box extends from 25th to 75th percentiles, and dots are outliers beyond the 1.5× interquartile range. f, correlation plots for 60-plex (up) and tsc 165-plex (down) experiments comparing estimated (x axis) and expected multiplet rates (y axis). ten points are shown from one to ten cells encapsulated per ccd and colors are matched to e. g, correlations of the cell composition estimates using the 60-plex (x axis) versus tsc 165-plex (y axis) experiments for main cell lineages (t and nk cell (left), b cell (middle), myeloid cells (right)) across the same ten donors represented in each pooled experiment. h, row-clustered heatmap of pairwise correlation of 43 overlapping markers between the 60-plex (row) and 165-plex (column) experiments. i, correlations of average expression (avg. expr.) for representative markers within specific cell types between the 60-plex (x axis) and 165-plex (y axis) experiments (cd19 in b cell, cd4 in cd4 t cells, cd8a in cd8 t cells). the p values for f, g and i are calculated as the corresponding two-sided p value for the t-distribution with n−2 degrees of freedom. the same ten donors in ten pools (one donor stained in each well) were used for both 60- and 165-plex experiments.']. Reference sentences:[based on the adts 40% of ccds were estimated to be between cell-type multiplets which was consistent with estimates from the transcriptomic analysis (49.6% fig 1i and extended data fig 3a).after resolving both between and within cell-type multiplets using the combinatorial index of ab+pbc and dbc (fig 1j and extended data fig 3b) a total of 116827 cells were obtained at a collision rate of 25% effectively increasing the throughput by fourfold over standard workflows at the same collision rate.note that both the multiplet rates (r = 0.97 p < 0.01) and the co-occurrence rates of scito-seq antibodies from different pools (r = 0.93 p < 0.01) were highly cor- related between the expected and observed values (extended data fig 3c) suggesting that the encapsulation of multiple cells within a ccd is not biased for specific pools or cell types.within ccds with only one scito-seq pool barcode detected (singlets) the estimated proportions of t and b cells (t:b200k 5.0:1 for donor 1 and 1:2.8 for donor 2) were consistent with the expected proportions for each of the two donors and estimates obtained from the transcriptomic data (extended data fig 3d).in the 60-plex experiment we recovered 69733 ccds and resolved 219063 cells (fig 3ab and extended data fig 7bc) at a collision rate of 18.7%.in the tsc experiment we recovered 66774 ccds and resolved 203838 cells (fig 3cd) at a collision rate of 14.1%.further the observed multiplet rates were highly correlated (60-plex; r = 0.99 p < 0.001 tsc; r = 0.92 p < 0.001) with those obtained from simu- lation (fig 3f).after count normalization dimension- ality reduction and k-nearest neighbor graph construction the cells were clustered using the leiden algorithm into 26 and 19 clusters respectively and visualized in umap space (fig 3ac).the expected lymphoid and myeloid cell types were annotated with lineage markers (fig 3bd).29) (fig 3bd and extended data fig 8a).similar to previous observations (extended data fig 3b and 5b) a pair- wise analysis across all antibodies demonstrated no apparent cor- relation across pools (extended data fig 8cd) suggesting minimal pool-specific effects that may confound quantitative comparisons of multiple samples.the frequency estimates of t nk b and myeloid cell populations were highly correlated between experiments (r = 0.98–0.99 p < 0.001; fig 3g).further the expres- sion levels of 43 surface proteins profiled in both experiments were highly correlated when all pbmcs (fig 3h) and when only indi- vidual cell types (fig 3i) were analyzed.]
Patterns related to correlation between different experiments, cell types, and markers in single-cell transcriptomics data.

Text 609
10.1038/s41467-021-25101-9
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 1 performance evaluation of htlv-1/atl panel for human genome sequencing. a summary of the htlv-1/atl panel. b bar graph shows target gene coverage per 100 million reads in different sequencing platforms. c venn diagrams depict overlap between detected snvs by wgs, wes, and panelbased target-seq in mt-2 (left) and tl-om1 (right). d, e bar graphs show proportion of recalled snvs (d) and precision rates (e) by panel-based deep sequencing from serial diluted samples. snvs detected by wgs were used as reference. f scatter plots show observed vaf (x-axis) and expected vaf (yaxis) of detected snvs in mt-2 (upper) and tl-om1 (lower). the expected values were calculated from wgs and wes dataset diluted to 100% (black), 50% (dark gray), 20% (gray), 10% (blue), 5% (orange), and 1% (green). correlation coefficients (r) are provided in the graphs.']. Reference sentences:[a total of 4849 target regions covering a total length of 2 mb were targeted (fig 1a).normalized coverage (per 100 m reads) revealed that the htlv-1/atl panel afforded ultra-deep sequencing (fig 1b).panel-based capture sequencing detected the most somatic mutations called by wgs or wes in both cell lines (fig 1c).panel-based ultra-deep sequencing recalled 95.7% (mt-2) and 85.7% (tl- om1) of snvs in the presence of 10% abnormal dna (fig 1d).overall correlations between the expected and observed vafs were 0.98 (mt-2) and 0.95 (tl-om1) respectively (fig 1f).the rna-seq detected variant rnas corresponding to the dna variant frequencies including notch1p2514fs (gain-of- function mutation3839) in atl#2_n and stat3g618r (gain-of- function mutation940) in atn#3_n (supplementary fig 1a b).the hierarchical clustering of whole transcriptome data showed global changes in the expression patterns (supple- mentary fig 1c).in addition genes differentially expressed on a case-specific basis were also detected (supplementary fig 1d e).we found that some of their key target genes were upregulated in the corresponding mutant cells (supplementary fig 1f g).repre- sentative tf binding and the specific transcription of target genes (notch1 target hes441; stat3 target socs342) are provided using the integrative genome viewer (igv; supplementary fig 1h).substantial information could be obtained from the integrative analysis of panel genomic sequencing analysis (fig 3) and bulk transcriptome analysis (supplementary fig 1).the scrna-seq detected variant rnas corresponding to dna variant frequencies which assigned clusters (p ≤ 0.05; supplemen- tary fig 10).marker gene expression was used for lineage inference (supplementary fig 11).the genes included functional genes in regulatory t cell (treg) such as foxp3 ctla4 il2ra ccr4 tigit pdcd1 rtpkn2 ptger3 and tnfrsf4 (ox40) some of which were identified in aggressive atl cells (supplementary fig 12a).this gene was also identified as one of the genes overexpressed in post- onset atl cases (supplementary fig 12b).we analyzed garp/ lap expression by ﬂow cytometry and found that co-expression of surface garp/lap was significantly increased in cadm1+ -infected cells in atl (#2) and ac (3 cases) (fig 7g h and supplementary fig 12c).further transcriptome analysis identified ezh2 overexpression and related epigenetic silencing of h3k27me3 targets in ac (supplementary fig 13).k–o box plots show normalized log2 fold changes of commonly upregulated genes (511 genes) and case-specific genes at t1 (265 genes) (k l both defined in supplementary fig 1) myc_targest_v1 (196 genes) (m) e2f_targets (198 genes) (n) and h3k27me3 targets (608 genes) (o) in the indicated clusters at t1 and t2.]
Patterns related to correlation between expected and observed variant allele frequencies in different cells.

Text 610
10.1038/s41556-021-00740-8
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 5 | evaluation of the expression of melanocyte developmental programs from mammalian models in human non-volar cutaneous melanocyte developmental groups. a, schematic of human50,51 and corresponding mouse49 melanocyte development. in hair-bearing skin, both humans and mice develop follicular melanocytes (purple). mice retain a dermal melanocyte population (blue) in fully developed skin, whereas humans develop resident epidermal melanocytes (red) within the skin at all anatomical locations. the pink bar indicates human fetal ages captured in our dataset. b–f, the distribution of the indicated transcriptional program expression scores for individual cells within each developmental group. n=3,281 (adt), n=735 (neo), n=1,176 (fet) and n=63 (msc). the dashed line shows the mean expression. program scores were generated from published signatures of mouse melanoblasts (cells committed to the melanocyte fate) (b and c) from ref. 45 (b) and ref. 43 (c) (p=1.5×10−14 (b); p=1.0×10−8, p=2.3×10−19, p=5.9×10−28 (c)); mouse melanocytes from ref. 44 (d; p=2.8×10−13); mscs from mature hair follicles in adult mice from ref. 25 (e; p=4.5×10−38); and in vitro stages of differentiation of human pluripotent stem cells to melanocytes from ref. 46 (f; p=2.8×10−25). statistical significance was determined using one-sided man–whitney u-tests; p<1×10−7. the variance (reported below the corresponding group for each violin plot) of the average program expression among donors within the msc, fet, neo and adt groups was low showing concordance across ages within each group. g,h, the number of unique and overlapping genes of melanoblast-related gene signatures with the positive correlated component of the devmel profiles prg[msc] (g) and prg[fet] (h). mb, melanoblast. i,j, the number of unique and overlapping genes of differentiated melanocyte related gene signatures with the positively correlated component of the devmel profiles prg[neo] (i) and prg[adt] (j).']. Reference sentences:[diffusion pseudotime analy- sis pairwise differential gene expression and gene set enrichment analysis for gene ontology biological process (go-bp) terms4041 identified neonatal melanocytes (neo) as an intermediate tran- scriptional state between fetal (fet) and adult (adt) (fig 4a extended data fig 5 and 6 and supplementary table 4).our analyses did not reveal further substantial tran- scriptional changes associated with donor age in adult melanocytes (extended data fig 5c).to benchmark human mela- nocyte development against known mammalian developmental systems we assessed the expression the gene signatures previously defined during mouse melanocyte development2543–45 (fig 5a) and in vitro differentiation of human embryonic stem (es) cells into mature melanocytes46 within adt neo fet and msc non-volar fig 3 | anatomical site-specific melanocyte subpopulation enrichment arises during development and persists in adulthood.both the sennet et al.45 embryonic day 14.5 (e14.5) mouse melanoblast signature and the rezza et al.44 p4 and p5 mouse melanocyte signature were more highly expressed in the fet neo and adt melanocytes compared with in mscs (p < 1 × 10–12; fig 5bd).the observed low program expression in the human msc group defined here is therefore consistent with the experimental design of the sennet45 and rezza44 studies (fig 5bd).by contrast the marie et al.43 melanoblast signature was most highly expressed in mscs (>1.5-fold change compared with each other group p < 1 × 10–7; fig 5c).consistent with this finding the cd34+ mouse hair follicle msc gene set25 was most highly expressed in mscs (p = 5.4 × 10–38; fig 5e).the fetal skin specimens in our dataset coincide with the onset and later stages of human hair follicle development which would encompass morphological stages that resemble mouse hair follicle development at e15.5 and e17.5 from marie et al.43 (fig 5a).of the in vitro differentiation programs the mature differenti- ated melanocyte program was expressed across all developmental groups with the highest expression in fet neo and adt groups compared with mscs (p < 1× 10 –14; fig 5f).comparison of devmel program genes with those identified in mouse or in human in vitro differentiation yielded sparse over- lap (fig 5g–j) indicating that our approach revealed previously unidentified programs that are specific to human fetal neonatal and adult skin.]
Patterns related to correlation in gene expression scores across different developmental groups of melanocytes were analyzed, showing consistency within each group. Unique gene signatures specific to human skin development were identified.

Text 611
10.1038/s41588-021-00911-1
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 6 | mapping breast cancer heterogeneity using spatially resolved transcriptomics. a, complete h&e images of all three tissue regions analyzed using visium for the sample tnbc cid44971. pathological annotation of morphological regions into distinct categories including normal ductal (purple), stromal and adipose (blue), lymphocyte aggregates (yellow), ductal carcinoma in situ (dcis) (orange) and invasive cancer (red). black scale bars, 500μm. b, deconvolution of the major cell type lineages in tnbc cid44971. values signify the scaled cell type abundances per spots (columns) and are grouped by pathology annotation as in a. c, box plot of gm scores grouped by clinical subtype across the six cases (n=11,535 spots from 4 tnbc tumors and 2 er+ tumors). only cancer-filtered spots were used for this analysis. signature scores were computed using the aucell method. statistical significance was determined using a two-sided t-test in a comparison of means between groups, with p values adjusted using the benjamini–hochberg procedure. the box plots depict the first and third quartiles as the lower and upper bounds, respectively. the whiskers represent 1.5× the iqr and the center depicts the median. p<0.0001. d, pearson correlation heatmap of breast cancer gms in tnbc cid44971 (two-sided correlation coefficient, benjamini–hochberg-adjusted p<0.05). spots with high cancer epithelial abundances (>10%) were scored with gm signatures using aucell. e, negative correlation between gm3 (emt) and gm4 (proliferation/cell cycle) across all cancer epithelial spots from six breast cancers analyzed by spatially resolved transcriptomics (two-sided correlation coefficient, p<0.05). f,g, aucell signature scores of gm3 (f) and gm4 (g) overlaid onto cancer epithelial spots in tnbc cid44971, as defined in the bottom left and right tissue sections in a.']. Reference sentences:[when we examined a wider list of immune checkpoint molecules across the entire dataset using unsupervised hierarchical clustering (extended data fig 6) differences in check- point molecule expression among clinical subtypes were more apparent including on non-immune cells such as cafs.cell types were associated with their appropriate pathological annotation (fig 6b).this revealed the expected enrichment of gm3 (emt ifn mhc) and gm4 (proliferation) across tnbc cases and gm1 and gm5 (er luminal) across er+ cases (fig 6c and extended data fig 9c).b–e scaled deconvolution values for icafs (b) myofibroblast-like cafs (c) cd4+ (d) and cd8+ t cells (e) overlaid onto tissue spots as defined in the bottom left and right tissue sections in fig 6a.g scaled deconvolution values for macrophage cxcl10/c9 cells overlaid onto tissue spots as defined in fig 6a.intriguingly gm3 (emt ifn mhc) and gm4 (proliferation) showed strong negative correlations in all samples (fig 6e–g) suggesting that these distinct cancer phenotypes occur in mutually exclusive regions of breast cancers.]
Summary: Correlation patterns between EMT and proliferation signatures in breast cancer epithelial spots, indicating mutually exclusive cancer phenotypes.

Text 612
10.1038/s41588-021-00911-1
Keyword: [correlation]. Caption: ['fig 7 | spatially mapping new heterotypic cellular interactions. a, heatmap of pearson correlation values between subclasses of cafs, pvl cells, endothelial cells, macrophage subsets and lymphocytes in 13 cases (two-sided correlation coefficient, benjamini–hochberg-adjusted p<0.05). each tumor is stratified by the clinical subtype, including four tnbcs (blue), two er+ (red) analyzed in this study and seven her2+ (pink) cases from the lundeberg et al. study56. b–e, scaled deconvolution values for icafs (b), myofibroblast-like cafs (c), cd4+ (d) and cd8+ t cells (e) overlaid onto tissue spots, as defined in the bottom left and right tissue sections in fig 6a. representative tnbc case cid44971 is shown. f, spatial proximity of selected caf t cell signaling molecules. heatmap of interaction scores for selected ligand–receptor pairs in the top 10% of tissue spots enriched for icafs and cd4+/ cd8+ t cells. only differentially expressed caf ligands and t cell receptors detected by scrna-seq using mast were included. g, scaled deconvolution values for macrophage cxcl10/c9 cells overlaid onto tissue spots as defined in fig 6a. representative tnbc case cid44971 is shown.']. Reference sentences:[when we reclustered b cells we observed two major subclusters (naive and memory) with plasmablasts forming a separate cluster (extended data fig 7ab).we identified conventional dendritic cells (cdcs) that expressed either clec9a (cdc1:clec9a/c3) or cd1c (cdc2:cd1c/c11) plas- macytoid dcs (pdcs) that expressed irf7 (pdc:irf7/c4) and a lamp3 high dc population43 (dc:lamp3/c0) which was previ- ously not reported in single-cell studies of breast cancer (fig 4c and extended data fig 7d).macrophages formed six clusters includ- ing a cluster (mac:cxcl10/c9) with features previously associated with an ‘m1-like’ phenotype and two clusters (mac:egr1/c10 and mac:siglec1/c5) resembling the ‘m2-like’ phenotype all of which bear some resemblance to tams previously described in breast cancers (extended data fig 7c)10.these cells bear close transcriptomic similarity to a recently described population of lipid-associated macrophages (lams) that expand in obese mice and humans44 including high expression of trem2 and lipid/ fatty acid metabolic genes such as fabp5 and apoe (fig 4c and extended data fig 7de).we observed a substantially reduced propor- tion of lam1:fabp5 cells in her2+ tumors (fig 4d and extended data fig 7f) suggesting that unique features of tumor genomics or microenvironment regulate lam1/2 fate.while the rna encoding pd-l1 (cd274) and pd-l2 (pdcd1lg2) was highly coexpressed by the mac:cxcl10 and dc:lamp3 myeloid populations (fig 4f) analysis of the cite-seq data demonstrated a broader distribution of pd-l1 and pd-l2 protein expression across the mac:cxcl10 lam1:fabp5 lam2:apoe and dc:lamp3 clusters (fig 4b and extended data fig 7g) highlighting lam1/2 as important sources of immunoregulatory molecules.we identified mod- est negative pearson correlations between myofibroblast-like cafs and icafs in five of six cases (fig 7a–c).similar caf localizations were consistent in an independent spatial transcriptomics dataset of 7 her2+ breast tumors56 suggesting that this relationship is con- served across clinical subtypes (fig 7a).consistent with the immu- noregulatory properties of icafs described above icafs colocalized with several lymphocyte populations across both studies including memory/naive b cells and cd4+/cd8+ t cells (fig 7a and fig 7de).myofibroblast-like cafs correlated with cd8+ t cells in six samples (fig 7a) suggesting a functional relevance to invasive breast can- cers with high til infiltration or an immune inflamed phenotype.this revealed an enrichment of immunoregulatory icaf ligands and cognate t cell receptors in close proximity including chemokines (cxcl12/cxcl14-cxcr4 and cxcl10-cxcr3) the complement pathway transforming growth factor-β (tgfb1/tgfb3-tgfbr2) and lymphocyte inhibitory/activation molecules (ltb-ltbr tnfsf14-ltbr and ltb-cd40 vtcn1/b7h4-btla) (fig 7f and extended data fig 9f).earlier we defined macrophage states lam1 lam2 and mac:cxcl10/c9 with high expression of immunoregulatory mol- ecules such as pd-l1 and pd-l2 (extended data fig 7g).lam1 and lam2 cells showed a modest negative spa- tial correlation with each other in most cases which might indicate that a common lam cell is polarized toward lam1 or lam2 by their local tme (fig 7a).lam2 cells rather than lam1 cells were positively correlated with cd4+ and cd8+ t cells in eight tumors across all three subtypes (fig 7a).in addition positive pearson correlations were identified between mac:cxcl10/c9 and cd8 t cells across many cases (fig 7a) which were mostly enriched in spots annotated as invasive cancer + stroma + lymphocytes (fig 7g and extended data fig 9e) suggesting these niches may have functional relevance in regulating antitumor immunity.]
Patterns of correlation between different cell types, such as myofibroblast-like cafs and icafs, and their interactions with immune cells in breast cancer.

