Text 1
10.1016/j.cell.2015.05.002
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure s6b). (f) trajectory of amacrine clustering as a function of number of cells analyzed. three different downsampled datasets were generated: (1) 500, (2) 2,000, or (3) 9,731 cells (supplemental experimental procedures). cells identified as amacrines (clusters 3–23) in the full analysis are here colored by their cluster identities in that analysis. analyses of smaller numbers of cells incompletely distinguished these subpopulations from one another.']. Reference sentences:[]
Summary: Trajectory of cell clustering based on number of cells analyzed, with incomplete subpopulation distinction in smaller datasets.

Text 2
10.1016/j.celrep.2015.04.062
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 3. spatial trajectory analysis of organ of corti longitudinal rows (a) schematic illustration and color code. tissue was dissected into apical and basal halves prior to cell sorting. (b and b0) pca of ger cells (figure 2j) utilizing all genes regardless of apex-tobase expression differences. cells are projected onto pc1/pc2 and colorcoded in blue and orange based on anatomical origin. no obvious segregation of apical versus basal-derived cells is apparent. (b0) cells colored in light gray were derived from a few selected control experiments where we explicitly isolated cells from the middle turn or from the whole cochlear duct. this control was done to validate the accuracy of the methodology and is illustrated in detail in figure s5. (c and c0) pca of ger cells using only genes that differ by at least 2-fold expression between apical and basal-derived cells. upon projection onto']. Reference sentences:[each subpopulation was then reanalyzed by pca tak- ing only genes into account with dlog2ex values >±1 corre- sponding to an at least 2-fold expression difference between both anatomical sides (figure 3c).for the purpose of data visualization we aligned all nine cell populations in their respective coordinate space such that the apex-to-base axis (defined by the centroid-centroid vector) was presented vertically (figure 3d).finally we assembled the nine cell popula- tions side-by-side in an order that reﬂects the medial-to-lateral anatomical axis (figure 3e).our interpretation of these observations is that the figure 3.]
Summary: Trajectory analysis of cell populations based on genes with at least 2-fold expression difference between anatomical sides, aligned along the apex-to-base axis.

Text 3
10.1016/j.cell.2015.09.004
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 7. conservation of org marker gene expression in primates (a) bar graph indicates average differential percentile rank of pan-rg, org, and vrg genes for radial glia gene coexpression network specificity in human and mouse. compared with pan-rg genes (n = 29), human org genes (n = 66) show reduced conservation with mouse radial glia signature (p < 0.05, wilcoxon rank sum test). (b) mouse e15.5 and e18.5 cortical sections immunoreacted for tnc and ptprz1 along with sox2 and eomes. inset images show a magnified view of svz region, and arrows highlight examples of sox2-positive, eomes-negative cells that co-label for tnc or ptprz1. lge, lateral ganglionic eminence; ctx, cortex. (c) heatmaps show average expression level of org, vrg, and pan-rg genes in distinct regions of developing macaque cortex. ivz, inner vz; ovz, outer vz; the nih blueprint non-human primate (nhp) atlas. in situ hybridization of macaque cortex showing expression of org marker genes mirrors human trajectory. (d) radial glia in small rodent brains are concentrated along the ventricle and access cerebrospinal ﬂuid trophic factors directly via apical processes. in contrast, large primate brains contain numerous radial glia in the osvz. local production of growth factors by radial glia may provide additional trophic support to org cells in the osvz niche. (e) increased expression of extracellular matrix proteins that potentiate growth factor signaling and activation of lifr/stat3 pathway may further maintain stemness in org cells. see also figure s7.']. Reference sentences:[to investigate whether human org markers are expressed in mouse radial glia we used recently published gene coexpression networks (lui et al. 2014) and found that on average human org markers are less likely to show specific expression in mouse radial glia than general radial glia markers (figure 7a).immunostaining for tnc and ptprz1 revealed that both proteins are most strongly detected in the vz and svz of the lateral and ventral pallium (figure 7b) where mouse org cells are most common (wang et al. 2011b).closer examination of sox2-positive cells in the svz revealed examples of putative mouse org cells ex- pressing tnc and ptprz1 (figure 7b insets).using microarray data from developing macaque cortex we found that the expression of org marker genes in macaque development mirrors that of human development (figure 7c).we detected expression of tnc ptprz1 and hopx in macaque vz early in development but found that osvz expression of these markers along with fam107a predominates at later stages of corticogenesis (figure 7d).interestingly tnc contains egf-like repeats and figure 7.]
Summary: Expression patterns of org marker genes in different species' cortical development trajectories are compared, showing conservation and divergence.

Text 4
10.1101/gr.192237.115
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure s4. ordering cells by cell cycle progression and examining changes in population frequencies (a) a large proportion of the transcriptome is correlated with cell cycle status. shown is the average expression of genes (rows) along the inferred cell cycle progression (columns, cells ordered according to cell cycle trajectory), as calculated with a sliding window of 150 cells, for genes with a significant upregulation (top) or downregulation (bottom) in any window of cycling cells, compared to the non-cycling cells [color bar, log2(fold change relative to g0)]. (b) ordering cells by cell cycle progression. shown is the same plot as in figure 2d with edges connecting adjacent cells based on the inferred cell cycle ordering. as described in methods, the ordering was defined by dividing the cells into four regions (marked by shaded boxes) and ordering cells within each region by the apparent direction of cell cycle progression (marked by gray arrows). non-connected cells were not included in the cell cycle ordering due to ambiguities of their ranking. (c) the relative frequency of cells from each population (y axis; cell type and age; colored curves) along the inferred cell cycle progression (x axis), shown with a sliding window of 100 cells. relative frequency was defined as the log2-ratio of the frequency in a specific window of cells divided by the average frequency across all windows. (d) cell cycle progression analysis of cells and an additional biological replicate of lt-hsc and st-hscs. cells were ordered according to their inferred cell cycle progression (see figure s3a) and the average expression of g1/s, s and g2/m genes (whitfield et al. 2002) was calculated with a sliding window of 11 cells. (e) cell cycle distribution changes with age. for each cell type, including biological replicates of lt-hsc and st-hscs derived from different set of mice, shown is the log2 of the ratio between percentages of old cells divided by the percentage of young cells along the inferred cell cycle progression (with a sliding window of 150 cells). shaded colors reflect the inferred cell cycle phases.']. Reference sentences:[]
Summary: Cell cycle progression patterns and changes in population frequencies along the trajectory are analyzed, with gene expression changes and cell type distributions shown.

Text 5
10.1038/ncomms9557
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 5 | ordering single cells along a differentiation trajectory reveals mechanistic insights into utricular hc differentiation. (a) ordering of sc to hc differentiation using monocle. on the basis of the model illustrated in fig 4b, cells from the sc.ii and hc.ii–iv clusters were used for ordering. individual']. Reference sentences:[these genes included more known markers as well as genes not previously known to be specific to each cell type (supplementary fig 5).using the existing utricular cell data the monocle single-cell analysis toolset32 was applied to order cells differentiating along the path of sc.ii to hc.iii–iv (fig 5a).expression of genes with known temporal patterns were plotted along pseudo-time (fig 5b).such as dkk3 and hes1 decreased over pseudo-time while genes such as pou4f3 myo7a gfi1 atoh1 hes6 and jag2 which are upregulated in developing hcs33–40 increased at an early point along the trajectory (fig 5b).next monocle was used to define four clusters of genes with distinct kinetic trends over pseudo-time (fig 5c; supplementary data 2).the average trends show that expression of many early hc genes occurs in an abrupt switch-like pattern at the onset of differentiation (early) whereas silencing of sc genes occurs more gradually (off fig 5c).35) (fig 5bc) that turn on early but are not sustained (transient) 0 5 10 15 log2 (expression) genes cells actb gapdh cdh2 lfng heyl sox2 isl1 actb gapdh cdh2 lfng heyl sox2 isl1 jag1 gli3 notch3 notch2 maml2 hes1 hey1 slc1a3 egr3 notch1 sox9 cdh1 myo6 pou4f3 dll1 atoh1 pax2 dach1 jag2 gfi1 slc17a8 barhl1 pvalb tec sc sc–hc hc house sensory sc hc tec primer assays mouse universal cdna mouse utricular se cdna myo6 temperature (°f) 61 71 81 91 –drn / dt 0.00 –0.03 0.14 melt curve a b c d e f g ct 25 20 15 10 5 0 0.002 0.02 0.2 2 20 cdna (ng) ct 0.4 0.3 0.2 0.1 0.0 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 efficiency frequency 20 10 0 –10 –20 –20 –10 0 10 20 pc1 pca pc2 sc sc-hc hc r2 = 1.0 r2 = 0.95 0 0 5 5 10 10 15 0 5 10 15 0 5 10 15 15 0 5 10 15 0 5 10 15 0 5 10 15 0 5 10 15 0 5 10 15 0 5 10 15 0 5 10 15 0 5 10 15 c1 ifc 2 c1 ifc 1 c1 ifc 1 biomark ifc 1 biomark ifc 1 biomark ifc 2 biomark ifc 3 biomark ifc 3 biomark ifc 2 c1 ifc 3 c1 ifc 3 c1 ifc 2 r2 = 0.92 r2 = 0.97 r2 = 0.96 r2 = 0.91 r2 = 0.97 r2 = 0.97 myo6 e = 10(1/slope) <1.00 <2.45 3.18 4.63 6.08 7.53 8.98 10.43 11.88 13.33 14.78 16.23 17.68 19.13 20.58 22.03 23.48 24.93 26.38 27.83 >28.55 >30.00 log2(expression) figure 3 | single-cell qpcr identifies distinct cell types in the p1 utricle.monocle indicated that pou4f3 has a particularly early onset and we found pou4f3 þ nuclei residing within the sc nuclear layer (fig 5de).at the other end of the temporal spectrum xirp2of and fscn2 only labelled large stereocilia bundles from mature-looking hcs (fig 5fg).smaller more immature-appear- ing hcs that did not express xirp2 and fscn2 in their bundles were concentrated in the less developed lateral region of the utricle (fig 5fg).the number of clusters (k ¼ 4 fig 5c) was selected empirically based on the maximum cluster number that produced average trends that appeared dissimilar.]
Summary: Gene expression patterns along a differentiation trajectory from stem cells to hair cells, revealing temporal changes in known and novel genes.

Text 6
10.1126/science.aad2456
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 1. olfactory neurons exhibit large-scale shifts in gene expression during development. (a) unsupervised analysis of single cell gene expression profiles with monocle revealed a linear trajectory (black line) along which cells develop in a dimension referred to as “pseudotime”. coloring of cells based on the expression of developmental markers shows that the trajectory corresponds to a stepwise development from olfactory progenitors to precursors to immature osns to mature osns. (b) global analysis of gene expression kinetics along the trajectory identified 3,830 genes that vary significantly over pseudotime development (fdr < 5% by a tobit-valued generalized linear model likelihood ratio test; see methods). hierarchical clustering of these genes via ward’s method recovered 11 non-redundant groups that covary over the trajectory. cluster analysis indicates that multiple large shifts in gene expression occur as neurons progress through development. the bar on top shows the locations of individual cells, colored by stage of development, along this developmental trajectory. (c) kinetic diagrams show the expression of known markers of different developmental stages over the developmental progression. parentheses indicate the groups in which genes are found in part b. dots indicate individual cells colored according to developmental stage. black lines indicate loess smoothing (span = 0.75, degree = 2) of log-transformed fpkm values over developmental pseudotime.']. Reference sentences:[mono- cle showed a linear nonbranch- ing trajectory of development (fig 1a).clusters of genes changed in expression dur- ing specific developmental periods suggesting sequential large and coordinated changes in gene expression during osn development (fig 1b and table s1).in kinetic diagrams markers of early and late developmental stages show peak expression early and late in the developmental progression respectively (fig 1c and fig s2).]
Summary: Sequential large shifts in gene expression occur along a linear trajectory of single cell development, with distinct clusters of genes varying over pseudotime.

Text 7
10.1016/j.celrep.2015.12.082
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 2. ordering of cells through the developmental trajectory (a) we inferred a smooth progression over the developmental lineage, represented as pseudotime, using two different methods. here we demonstrate the path of both pseudotimes by regressing them into a t-sne plot of the data. points are colored based on the cluster the cells belong to. (b) the pseudotime inferred with two different methods correlate very strongly (spearman correlation 0.97). (c) expression of cd41 mrna (top), gfp mrna (middle), and gfp ﬂuorescence (bottom) shown in pseudotime. each point represents an individual cell; points are colored based on the cluster the cells belong to. see also figure s3.']. Reference sentences:[comparing the paths these orderings take when regressed into the t-sne depiction one can appreciate the similarity between them (figure 2a).the two pseudotime orderings agreed very strongly (spearman correlation 0.97; figure 2b) giving us confidence in our method.when presented in pseudotime the expression of endoge- nous cd41 (also known as itga2b) and egfp as well as egfp ﬂuorescence recorded during sorting were highly correlated and showed an expected increase through pseudotime (spearman rho 0.85 0.80 and 0.82 respectively) (figure 2c).good marker genes for clus- ter 2 included e2f8 which encodes a protein involved in progres- sion through the cell cycle (deng et al. 2010) and top2a a dna topoisomerase involved in processes such as chromosome a b c figure 2.without any information about the egfp expression the bayesiangplvm recovers our original ordering up to orientation (spearman correlation 0.97; figure 2b) (notebook 7 in data s2).we can depict the inferred pseudotime by regressing it into the two-dimen- sional tsne space (figure 2a) and can see how well the two methods of con- structing pseudotime agrees.]
Summary: The figure illustrates the developmental trajectory of cells, showing a smooth progression over pseudotime with strong correlation between methods and marker gene expressions.

Text 8
10.1126/science.aaf6463
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 2. oligodendrocyte cell states in the continuous maturation process from precursors to mature cells. (a) t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding projection showing the trajectory from opcs to mature oligodendrocytes. (b) average (±sem) expression of marker genes for opcs, cops, and vlmcs. representative markers are overlaid on the t-sne map (gray, low expression; red, high expression). (c) results of smfish for sox10, ctps (mfol marker), and klk6 (mol marker) confirm that these populations are distinct. dapi, 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole. scale bar, 7.5 mm. (d) immunohistochemistry of col1a1 (vlmcs), pdgfra (opcs and vlmcs), and tomato lectin (blood vessels) in the brain at p21. white arrowhead, vlmcs; yellow arrowhead, opcs (col1a1–). scale bars, 25 mm.']. Reference sentences:[t-distributed sto- chastic neighbor embedding (t-sne) (fig 2a) supported by pseudotime analysis (fig s2 a and b) indicated a narrow differentiation path connecting oligodendrocyte precursor cells (opcs) and myelin-forming oligodendrocytes which then diversify into six mature states.oligodendrocyte precursor cells coexpressed pdgfra and cspg4 (fig 2b and fig s1b and s10) and 10% coexpressed cell cycle genes (fig s2 e and f) consistent with a cell division turn- over of 19 days in the juvenile cortex (7).single-molecule fluorescence rna in situ hybridization (smfish) showed that myelin-forming populations (ctps+) were distinct from mature oligodendrocytes (klk6+) (fig 2c and fig s4d).these cells exhibited low levels of cspg4 (ng2) (fig 2b) and specifically expressed lum (fig 2b and fig s4) markers of the pericyte lineage (vtn and tbx18) (fig 2b and fig s1b and s2d) and laminins and collagens characteristic of the basal lamina.pdgfra+ and sox10– vlmcs were localized on blood vessels (fig 2d and fig s4 and s11 a and b) and men- inges (fig s11 a to c).in contrast col1a1– and pdgfra+ opcs were distributed in the paren- chyma in close association but not overlapping with the vasculature (fig 2d and fig s11b) (18).newly formed myelin forming mature ol tsne1 tsne2 col1a1 pdgfra lectin density vlmc opc cop nfol1 nfol2 mfol1 mfol2 mol1 mol2 mol3 mol4 mol5 mol6 precursors pdgfra+ pdgfra cspg4 ptprz1 pcdh15 vcan sox6 gpr17 neu4 bmp4 nkx2-2 tbx18 vtn lum col1a2 opc vlmc cop nfol mfol mol cop opc vlmc vlmc vlmc cop opc cop opc sox10/ctps/klk6/dapi sox10 klk6 ctps 7.5um sox10+ klk6+ ctps- sox10+ klk6- ctps+ dapi fig 2.we were unable to identify region- or age (juvenile versus adult)–specific subpopulations of opcs in our data set (fig 2a and 4 a and b).similarly cops and newly formed oligodendrocytes were present in all regions in juvenile mice (fig 1c and 4a) revealing a com- mon trajectory of differentiation between the various regions (fig 2a).(a) t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding projections as in fig 2a with colored dots representing cells from each of the 10 cns regions analyzed.]
Patterns of cell differentiation from precursor to mature cells in a continuous trajectory.

Text 9
10.1182/blood-2016-05-716480
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 4. pseudotime analysis reveals trends in surface marker and gene expression for differentiation trajectories. (a) diffusion map colored by pseudotime trajectories to e, gm, and l fates. each trajectory starts from an hsc (blue) and ends with a progenitor (red). (b) changes in surface marker expression and fsc-h through pseudotime for each of the 3 trajectories obtained from the normalized index data. for each trajectory, it is possible to see what cell types are passed through to reach the final cell fate. (c) normalized expression of genes positively (up) or negatively (down) correlated with the pseudotemporal ordering for each trajectory. mean normalized expression is plotted with standard deviation. (d) most significant relevant terms from gene set enrichment analysis for all the trajectories, performed in enrichr. terms with an adjusted p value ,.05 (using benjamini-hochberg correction for multiple testing) were considered significant. the full tables of results can be found in the supplemental data. mgi, mouse genome informatics.']. Reference sentences:[mapping differentiation trajectories from the single-cell expression landscape havingestablishedthatsinglecellsinthediffusionmaparearrangedina pattern consistent with known lineage relationships we next identified 3 differentiation trajectories (see “methods”) starting each time with e-slam hscs and ending with e gm and l progenitors (figure 4a).visualization of surface marker expression from the index data revealed dynamic profiles consistent with known expression patterns thus validating the pseudotemporal ordering (figure 4b).wenextidentifiedgenesshowingstatistically significantpositive or negative correlation with the pseudotemporal ordering (figure 4c).gene set enrichment analysis (figure 4d) showed enrichments consistent with the respective trajectories such as tetrapyrrole biosynthesis for e upregulated genes and neutrophil-mediated immunity for gm upregulated genes.up down n = 112 n = 145 n = 56 n = 24 n = 20 n = 587 up down up down 0.00 0.25 0.50 pseudotime 0.75 1.00 e 1.00 0.75 0.50 0.25 0.00 normalized expression normalized index data c b a d gene set enrichment analysis terms shown with adjusted p values (benjamini-hochberg method for correction for multiple hypotheses testing) 0mitotic cell cycle tetrapyrrole bio- synthetic process 8.0 x 10-7 atp binding 3.0 x 10-11 abnormal hematopoietic system 9.0 x 10-8 mitotic cell cycle 0 megakaryocyte erythrocyte progenitor 1.7 x 10-21 mast cells 0.0028 granulocyte monocyte progenitor 1.3 x 10-6 stem cells hsc 0.0032 thymocyte dp cd4+cd8+ 0.049 mast cells 3.5 x 10-6 mitotic cell cycle 4.2 x 10-8 cytokine sig- naling in imm- une system 0.012 no significant terms hemostasis 0.00081 hemostasis 2.4 x 10-6 abnormal immune system 1.8 x 10-7 abnormal immune system 7.2 x 10-7 abnormal immune system 0.021 abnormal homeostasis 0.0082 abnormal hematopoietic system 0.0028 leukocyte activation 0.0012 cytochrome-c oxidase activity 0.010 guanyl nucleotide binding 0.035 no significant terms no significant terms no significant terms mitotic cell cycle 1.01 x 10-9 neutrophil medi- ated immunity 0.012 coagulation 0.017 regulation of iymphocyte differentiation 0.063 hemostasis 0.0091 category e up e down gm up gm down l up l down biological processes molecular function mgi mammalian phenotype reactome (pathways) cell types (mouse gene atlas) gm l e dc2 dc2 dc2 dc3 dc3 dc3 dc1 dc1 dc1 gm l fsc-h cell type e gm l cd34 cd16 epcr fik2 cd150 cd48 sca1 pseudotime lt-hsc lmpp mpp1 mpp2 mpp3 pseudotime st-hsc mep cmp gmp unassigned fsc-h cell type cd34 cd16 epcr fik2 cd150 cd48 sca1 fsc-h cell type high low cd34 cd16 epcr fik2 cd150 cd48 sca1 figure 4.as expected from the gene set enrichment analysis (figure 4d) there is no substantial increase of either hydrogen ion transmembrane transport or cell cycle genes along the l trajectory.we next used the spike-in based normalization to investigate whether genes identified as downregulated in figure 4 were indeed downregulated in real terms (eg fewer mrna molecules per single cell).however the majority of downregulated genes from figure 4 were downregulated in absolute termsalong the eand gmtrajectories (109 of 112 for e and 55 of 56 for gm) thus highlighting a subset of genes actively expressed in hscs despite their quiescent and metabolically less-active state (supplemental table 1).]
Patterns of differentiation trajectories from stem cells to progenitors, reflected in surface marker and gene expression changes over pseudotime.

Text 10
10.1182/blood-2016-05-716480
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 6. single-cell analysis can be used to estimate absolute differences in total mrna content across cell types. (a) schematic explanation of how plate composition and ercc spike-ins are used to estimate absolute rna levels. the plate organization for this study included cells from multiple sorting gates (hspc, prog, lt-hscs) and each well contained ercc spike-ins. the sequencing depth varies across lanes and cell types; therefore, ercc spike-ins are used to normalize across cell types within a lane, in which the spike-in content becomes level within a lane but cell mrna content may still vary. after this step, rna content can be normalized across lanes. (b) diffusion map of all cells was colored by rna content. estimates of total rna content were calculated by summing the absolute normalized counts per cell. the scale ranges from blue to green to yellow to red with increasing rna content. (c) sum of normalized counts for e-slams, lmpps, gmps, and meps colored by the scheme used in figure 1a. significance in differences in rna content between cell types was calculated by using a 1-way analysis of variance test (p , .001; p , .0001). (d) fsc-h for e-slams, lmpps, gmps, and meps, colored by the scheme used in figure 1a. fsc-h is used as an indicator of cell size. significance in differences in fsc-h between cell types was calculated by using a 1-way analysis of variance test (p , .001; p , .0001). (e) most relevant significant terms from gene enrichment expression analysis on genes downregulated in absolute terms in e-only, gm-only, and e and gm trajectories. the numbers of genes showing downregulation along pseudotime in absolute terms is displayed in the venn diagram. terms with an adjusted p value ,.05 (using benjamini-hochberg correction for multiple testing) were considered significant. the full tables of results can be found in the supplemental data.']. Reference sentences:[to estimate total mrna content per cell we used external spike-in controls sorted single cells from hspc progenitor and lt-hsc gates into all twenty 96-well plates in a predetermined layout and sequenced each plate on a single lane so that consistent differences between the amounts of reads between cell types would become detectable (figure 6a).estimation of absolute mrna content per cell revealed a gradual increase in average mrna con- tent from e-slam hscs to lmpps to gmps to meps (figure 6b-c) (cells assigned to populations based on index sorting data; figure 3).of note forward scatter is recognized as a correlate to cell size and showed a similar but not identical pattern (figure 6d) thus suggesting that mrnacontentpercellisrelatedbutnotcompletelycoupledtocellsize during early hsc differentiation.dc3 dc1 dc2 5e+05 1e+06 2e+06 5e+06 b e genes downregulated in pseudotime category e only e & gm gm only molecular function biological processes reactome (pathways) cell types (mouse gene atlas) mgi mammalian phenotype no significant terms no significant terms no significant terms no significant terms no significant terms no significant terms no significant terms no significant terms leukocyte activation 0.011 abnormal immune system 2.4 x 10-5 hemostasis 0.0031 blood coagulation 0.0042 hemostasis 0.00079 mast cells 2.6 x 10-5 no significant terms gene set enrichment analysis terms shown with adjusted p values (benjamini-hochberg method for correction for multiple hypotheses testing) 72 37 18 gm e c 0e+00 2e+06 4e+06 6e+06 8e+06 cell type sum of normalized counts 20000 e–slam lmpp gmp mep e–slam lmpp gmp mep 30000 40000 50000 cell type fsc–h d rna content lt-hsc prog hspc use ercc spike-ins to normalize within lanes normalize across lanes rna content lane lane rna content rna content lane a use plate composition and spike-ins to estimate absolute rna levels sequencing depth varies across lanes and cell types plates include cells from multiple sorting gates erccs lane lane erccs lane 1 2 3 1 2 3 1 2 3 1 2 3 1 2 3 1 2 3 erccs figure 6.]
Patterns related to trajectory were identified by analyzing gene expression changes along pseudotime in different cell types.

Text 11
10.1182/blood-2016-05-716480
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 5. analysis of cell cycle activation during hspc differentiation at single-cell resolution. (a) diffusion map of all cells colored by computationally assigned cell cycle category. there is no assignment for g0 separately because of limitations of the method. (b) proportion of e-slams, lmpps, gmps, and meps in each of the cell cycle categories. the cell types displayed are based on the narrow gating strategy. (c) gene set enrichment analysis was performed for the 3 trajectories after the removal of cell cycle genes. the most relevant significant terms for genes positively correlated with pseudotime analysis are shown. terms with an adjusted p value ,.05 (using benjaminihochberg correction for multiple testing) were considered significant. the full tables of results can be found in the supplemental data. (d) average expression of hydrogen ion transmembrane transport genes and cell cycle genes across pseudotime. each gene was normalized across the median of all 3 trajectories for plotting. the average expression is colored by trajectory, and means are shown with standard deviations. trna, transfer rna.']. Reference sentences:[to account for batch effect differences in ercc concentration between lanes (supplemental figure 5) we applied combat from the sva package using the sorting gate (hspc/prog/lt- hsc) as an adjustment variable.single-cell resolution analysis of cell cycle activation during hspc differentiation having identified cell cycle as the most highly enriched term for the genes upregulated along both the e and gm trajectories we next took advantage of a recently reported predictor for allocating individual cells to g0/g1 s and g2/m cell cycle categories based on their single-cell transcriptomes.35thedistribution of singlecells acrossthese 3cellcycle categorieswasingoodagreementwiththeenrichmentofcellcycleterms in the genes upregulated along the e and gm trajectories (figure 5a-b).of note the cell cycle–filtered genes upregulated in both the e and gm trajectories showed strong enrichment for terms associated with mitochondrial adenosine triphosphate production consistentwithpreviousreportsthathscsprimarilyuseglycolysis44-46 but switch to mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation to meet the rapidly increasing energy demands for differentiation.47 we next investigated how hydrogen ion transmembrane transport gene and cell cycle gene expression changes through pseudotime (figure 5d).]
Patterns related to cell cycle activation during differentiation, with trajectories showing gene enrichment and expression changes across pseudotime.

Text 12
10.1126/science.aad7038
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 3. transcriptional dynamics of adult neurogenesis by div-seq. (a) div-seq. edu is injected into adult mice and incorporates into dividing cells (5), isolated edu labeled nuclei are fluorescently tagged and captured by facs for snuc-seq. (b) adult neurogenesis in the dg (4). tan box: timing of edu labeling. bottom panel: edu labeling and tissue dissection (grey) time course. (c) a continuous trajectory of newborn cells in the dg. bisne 2-d embedding of neuronal lineage nuclei (n = 269). arrow: direction of trajectory determined by labeling time and marker expression. top: colored by labeling time (1-14 days). bottom: expression of markers, shown as: left, average expression along the trajectory; right, 2-d embedding colored by the expression level. markers (clockwise from top left): sox9 (nsc), notch1 (proliferation/differentiation), neurod1 (immature neurons), eomes/tbr2 (neuronal precursor). (d) expression waves along the trajectory. left: average expression of cluster genes along the trajectory. middle: heatmap of average expression of each gene along the trajectory and neurogenic stages (labeled as in b). right: representative enriched biological pathways..']. Reference sentences:[next to study transcriptional dynamics during adult neurogenesis we developed div-seq by combining snuc-seq with edu labeling of dividing cells (fig 3a).we applied div-seq in the dg a canon- ical neurogenic niche (4) over multiple time points (1-14 days after cell division fig 3b fig s17 table s4).the order of nuclei along the trajectory matched the edu labeling time (fig 3c) was independent of animal age (fig s17h) and recapitulated known dynamics of neurogenesis markers (2 3 15) (fig s18a) indicating that the trajectory indeed cap- tured the neuronal maturation process.to characterize the transcriptional program of adult neurogenesis we identified and clustered genes with dy- namic expression patterns along the trajectory (fig 3d and table s5).we found major coordinated transcriptional waves involving hundreds of genes and aligned with known transitions between neurogenic stages with expres- sion shifts from proliferation to neuronal differentiation (consistent with (2)) and then to neuronal integration and maturation (fig 3d).(d) dynamically expressed genes shared in sc and dg neurogenesis (347 genes from fig s22b and fig 3d).neuronal trajectories in the sc (as in c) and dg (as in fig 3c) colored by a glia-neuron rna expression score.]
Summary: Trajectory analysis reveals gene expression patterns along neuronal maturation process in adult neurogenesis.

Text 13
10.1126/science.aad7038
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 4. dynamics of adult newborn gabaergic neurons in sc. (a) divseq in sc captures opcs and immature neurons. distribution of cell types in non-edu-labeled and 6-7 days edu labeled nuclei. (b) div-seq captured nuclei expressing marker genes of immature (sox11) and gabaergic (gad1) neurons. box plots for immature neurons, mature neurons and opcs. red: median, box: 75% and 25% quantiles. (c) newborn cells in sc form a continuous trajectory. 2-d embedding of 1-7 days edu labeled and non-labeled nuclei (n=184, neuronal lineage nuclei), colored by labeling time. trajectory directionality is edu labeling time and marker genes. (d) dynamically expressed genes shared in sc and dg neurogenesis (347 genes from fig s22b and fig 3d). (e) gradual transition from a glia-like to neuronal state. neuronal trajectories in the sc (as in c) and dg (as in fig 3c) colored by a glia-neuron rna expression score. (f) region specific gene expression in immature neurons (6-7 days post edu). 236 genes differentially expressed between sc and dg (t-test fdr<0.05, logratio>1), in olfactory bulb (ob), sc and dg. box: average expression of example genes up-regulated in ob and sc compared to dg.']. Reference sentences:[sc nuclei 6-7 days post labeling (fig 4a-b) comprised a diverse popu- lation of newborn cells including oligodendrocyte precursor cells (opcs 44%) and immature neurons (19%) in contrast to 4% opcs and no immature neurons in the non-edu la- beled population.the sc newborn neurons expressed the gabaergic markers gad1 and gad2 suggesting gabaergic neurogenesis (18) (fig 4b).the full set of neuronal lineage nuclei (fig s20a) map to a continuous trajectory (fig 4c) that matched labeling time and expression dynamics of known markers (fig s20c).comparison of dynamically expressed genes along the sc and dg trajectories (fig s20b) identified 347 (28%) com- mon neurogenesis genes (fig 4d fig s20c) and revealed notable distinctions in expression dynamics and branching in the dg and sc (fig 4d-e and (6)) which can result from differences in time scales cell populations or parallel glio- genesis and neurogenesis processes.to identify candidate genes driving neuronal lineage specification we first identified differentially expressed genes between sc and dg (t-test) and then compared their expression patterns to those of newborn neurons in the ol- factory bulb (ob) where gabaergic neurons are born (fig 4f).]
Summary: Trajectory analysis reveals continuous development from glia-like to neuronal states in single-cell transcriptomics.

Text 14
10.1038/nmeth.3961
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 2 | transcriptional and dna methylation dynamics during human cellular reprogramming. (a) t-sne analysis of single-cell gene expression data. early reprogramming cells (red oval) cluster separately from the initial fibroblast cells (black oval). tra-1-60+ cells followed a trajectory toward more es-like gene expression (blue oval), while tra-1-60− cells followed an alternative trajectory (green oval). a subpopulation of tra-1-60+ cells (magenta oval) was closer to the es–ips cell cluster (gray oval), indicating a later stage of pluripotency. (b) t-sne analysis of single-cell dna methylation data. black and magenta ovals indicate unreprogrammed and reprogrammed cells, respectively. (c) gene expression dynamics of distinct gene groups across reprogramming time points and sample types. each violin plot shows the frequency distribution of the min–max normalized log2 expression of all genes per cell; horizontal lines represent mean values; error bars represent s.e.m. tra-1-60+ samples from days 16 and 24 are subdivided into cells that expressed only early-pluripotent genes and cells that expressed late-pluripotent genes. values in parentheses below each sample type indicate the number of cells in the sample group. (d) fraction of cells that have undergone de novo methylation (blue) or demethylation (red) at each time point (defined as cells in which half the loci have undergone methylation changes).']. Reference sentences:[our results showed that sc-gem is highly sensitive has a low incidence of dropouts in the dna methylation assay pro- vides accurate relative quantification of gene expression and has low levels of contamination probably by virtue of automation (supplementary fig 2).analysis of the single-cell gene expression data following dimensionality reduction using t-sne revealed a continuous trajectory of transcriptional changes (fig 2a) that reflected the stages of reprogramming.on the other hand t-sne analysis of single-cell dna methylation data divided cells into the unrepro- grammed cell cluster (containing bj day 8 and tra-1-60− cells) and the reprogrammed cell cluster (containing ips and es cells; fig 2b).analysis of the temporal dynamics of gene expression revealed a marked increase in the proportion of tra-1-60+ late pluripotent cells in day 24 compared with day 16 cells (fig 2c) highlighting the changes in cell-stage distributions that take place during reprogramming.we observed de novo methylation changes in the day 16 late-pluripotent population (fig 2d).]
Summary: Trajectory analysis of gene expression and DNA methylation dynamics during reprogramming, showing distinct cell transitions and stage-specific gene expression changes.

Text 15
10.1073/pnas.1610155113
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 6. coregulation and coexpression of synaptic molecules. (a) heat plot of correlations between genes representing cell adhesion-, exocytosis-, rhogap-, and rhogef-related molecules in hippocampal tissue. coefficients were computed based on gene expression values in five developmental stages in tissue samples. unsupervised clustering revealed 12 clusters (labeled on the right and top) based on 395,641 gene correlations. (b) same analysis as in a, but for single-cell data. coefficients were computed based on single-cell gene expression values independent of cell type identity. unsupervised clustering revealed five clusters (labeled on the right and top) based on the 187,489 gene correlations. (c) combined data of correlation coefficients from tissue and single-cell samples. gene pairs with both coefficients larger than the 92nd percentile of the respective distributions were further analyzed (green shaded area; see text for further information). (d) graph representation of correlation coefficients displayed in the green shaded area of c. each vertex connects two genes according to the correlation coefficient between the two. graph representation of correlations in c revealed two independent, uncorrelated subgraphs. (e, left) subgraph 1 and subgraph 2 remained independent when relaxing gene inclusion criteria (i.e., when green area in c was gradually increased). (right) density of vertex distribution (number of gene–gene correlations) followed power law distribution, indicating that both subgraphs were scale-free and nonrandom in nature. (f, left) mean normalized gene expression values in the two subgraphs showed diametrically opposite developmental trajectories, and suggest that genes in subgraph were developmentally coregulated. because single-cell expression was a selection criterion in c, these genes were also coexpressed at the single-cell level. (right) as suggested by the developmental differences, genes in subgraph 1 and subgraph 2 had different expression values in single cells of all three cell types, collected at ∼p21. (g) core early- and late-gene networks (subgraph 1 and subgraph 2, respectively) were identified by common motifs found in cell type-specific analyses (i.e., these correlations were present in pooled data from the three cell types, in pooled data from rs-int and fs-int cells, representing interneurons, and rs-int, fs-int, and ca1-pyr data, analyzed independently). averaged data represent mean ± sem.']. Reference sentences:[first we independently examined gene correlations in tissue and single-cell data and used unsupervised clustering to consoli- date these results (fig 6 a and b) which reflected developmental and cell type-specific characteristics respectively (fig s6a).we reasoned that functionally relevant correlations may be present in both sets with high correlation coefficients and therefore selected gene pair correlations that were in the tail of distributions (>92nd percentile; note that this threshold was chosen arbitrarily but that consequences of this analysis were thoroughly tested at multiple threshold values; fig 6e) both for tissue and single-cell data (fig 6c).the structure of the resulting graph was surprising because two independent subgraphs emerged that exhibited dense cor- relations within but no correlations between them (fig 6d; note the complete lack of interconnecting vertices; see fig s6c for complete gene listings in this graph).these analyses consistently revealed more intranetwork than internetwork correlations which re- versed when lowering inclusion threshold to 20 percentiles (0.2 correlation coefficient threshold in fig 6e left) suggesting robust independence (note that with “all inclusion” 0 percentile the graph is perfectly connected).however both subgraphs displayed a nonrandom “scale-free” nature where some genes were more interconnected than others following a power law distribution and thus suggesting a biological origin (fig 6e right) (43).specifically subgraph 1 included genes that were highly expressed during early devel- opment whereas subgraph 2 contained genes that exhibited later expression onsets with peak expressions occurring >2 wk after birth (fig 6f left).in agreement with this finding late expressing genes (subgraph 2) displayed higher expression than early express- ing genes (subgraph 1) in single cells of all three types (fig 6f right) which were collected at ∼p21.therefore we repeated analyses such that fig 6b only included rs-int or fs-int or ca1-pyr cells separately or rs-int b a synaptic cleft presynaptic terminal synaptic vesicle ca2+ snare complex synaptotagmin (syt) synaptobrevin (vamp) snap25 munc18 complexin (cplx) rab munc13 (unc13) rim rimbp active zone d c syntaxin (stx) 0 2 4 0 2 4 0 2 4 0 2 4 snap syntaxin synaptobrevin munc18 complexin synaptotagmin cask rab rim rimbp synuclein syntrophin munc13 ca1-pyr rs-int fs-int p21 tissue snap47 snap25 syt11 syt1 cplx1 snca sncg unc13a cask rab3a rab3c munc18-1 stx12 syt4 snare complex active zone proteins synaptotagmins normalized gene count (per thousand) 0.5 1.5 2.5 ca1-pyr rs-int fs-int p21 tissue normalized gene count (per thousand) chn1 arhgap25 arhgap5 arhgap3 32 4 0 1 mtap1b ywhae rasgrf1 rasgrp1 elmo1 apc ca1-pyr rs-int fs-int p21 tissue normalized gene count (per thousand) rims1 rims3 rims2 vamp2 syt6 vamp1 abr 0.5 1.5 2.5 32 4 0 1 0.5 1.5 2.5 32 4 0 1 0.5 1.5 2.5 32 4 0 1 arhgap21 rhogap rhogef synaptic exocytosis fig 5.we found that each of these analyses confirmed the independence of subgraphs 1 and 2 (fig s6b) and that the gene representation in each cell type-specific dataset was at least 80% identical to that in fig 6d (fig s6b) suggesting that coexpression of these genes occurs at the single- cell level.moreover we identified core parts of these subgraphs (i.e. parts that can be consistently detected in each cell type) by taking the intersection of the cell type-specific analyses (fig 6g).this hy- pothesis was supported by the existence of correlations between structurally relevant rhogef and rhogap molecules in early development when synapses are formed (fig 6g left and fig s6d upper).conversely emerging correlations between cell adhesion and exocytosis in the late-gene network may reflect synapse specialization (fig 6g right and fig s6d lower).(threshold) links (thousand) ‘scale-free’ properties 0 10 20 0 10 20 30 40 k p (k) within within between & 1 2 1 2 1 2 1 2 1 2 1 2 cask epha5 pcdh19 snap29 igsf8 clstn3 vamp1 ephb2 unc5d cbln2 fstl5 pik3r1 k 5 mtap1b snap25 mtap1a syt11 nrxn3 cplx1 p1 cd200 ptpn2 pcdh19 opcml nrxn1 ncam1 lrrn3 epha5 ctnnb1 chl1 erc1 cask ywhae mtap1b daam1 arhgef7 apc odz3 ptprn ppfia3 omg lrrn2 igsf8 epha6 cntnap1 clstn3 clstn1 bai2 app syt7 syt11 syt1 stxbp1 sncb snap47 rab3a cplx2 arhgap44 mtap1a dock10 arhgef9 clstn1 1 2 colors: exocytosisrhogap rhogef cams fig 6.finally the subiculum neuron data allowed us to test the validity of synaptic gene correlation networks described in fig 6.to reexamine the identity of the two networks we singled out overlapping gene correlations in all five cell types (fig 7i) and found that they were nearly identical to subgraph 1 and subgraph 2 identified based on the three ca1 cell types (fig 6g).(i) analyses of gene expression in bs-pyr and rs-pyr cells confirmed existence of early- and late-gene networks (shown in fig 6).]
Summary: Developmental trajectories of coregulated and coexpressed genes in single cells, forming two independent subgraphs with scale-free properties.

Text 16
10.1186/s13059-016-1033-x
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 6 snapshot and temporal scrna-seq profiling on progenitor cell states. scrna-seq from snapshots of lineage-specific progenitors revealed that hypoxia enhances de differentiation in a time-sensitive manner, likely acting on the mesendodermal progenitors. the differentiation trajectory was reconstructed by wave-crest (blue arrow) using time course scrna-seq along the differentiation towards de cells. results from loss-of-function and gain-of-function experiments demonstrated that klf8 function as a positive regulator mediating cell states transitions from t+ mesendoderm to cxcr4+ de cells. we hypothesize that klf8 can suppress t+ state and in turn enhance the activation of cxcr4+ state. the molecular mechanisms of how klf8 directly or indirectly suppress t+ state require future investigation']. Reference sentences:[altogether our single-cell analysis identified klf8 as a previously unrecognized positive regulator of the transition from mesendoderm to nascent de (fig 6).first there is a critical time window when the precursors of de are responsive to hypoxic conditions causing the initial upregulation of de markers (fig 6).whether t is a direct target of klf8 requires further examination (fig 6).it is plausible that klf8 may regulate the emt that is coupled with de specification (fig 6).]
The trajectory of cell state transitions from mesendoderm to DE cells, regulated by Klf8, is influenced by hypoxia.

Text 17
10.1016/j.cels.2016.08.010
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 4. defining spatial gene expression signatures (a) pseudospatial ordering of basal cells (n = 486) in t-sne space, using a minimum spanning tree. the longest path through the graph is highlighted and cells are colored according to second-level clustering. (b) validation of pseudospatial ordering of basal cells using known and new ife basal (krt14), upper hf (krt79), gli1+ outer bulge (aspn), general outer bulge (postn), and inner bulge (krt6a) markers. upper panel: gene expression in basal cells plotted along the pseudospace trajectory and fitted with a cubic smoothing spline (black line). lower panel: gene expression projected onto the t-sne map shown in (a).(d) ‘‘rolling wave’’ plot showing the spline-smoothed expression pattern of the 30 most significant spatially expressed tfs. tfs were ordered according to group membership and peak expression as shown in (c). p-values for pseudospace dependency are shown on the right. red line marks bonferroni-corrected significance threshold of 0.001. tfs marked in bold have not been previously described as relevant for cellular heterogeneity along the proximal-distal axis.',(e) peak positions of basal cell populations and ib i (defined in second-level clustering) on the spatial axis visualized by kernel density estimation. the organization of the cell populations confirms their spatial positioning in ife and hf along the proximal-distal axis.]. Reference sentences:[while collagen col17a1 a subset of glycopro- teins (agrn fcgbp) and most laminins (lama3 lama5 lamb2 lamc2) were expressed at equally high levels across all basal keratinocytes the majority of ecm genes exhibited a spatial expression corresponding to the pseudospace-related expres- sion patterns identified in figure 4c.]
Summary: Spatial gene expression patterns along a trajectory in single cells, validated with marker genes and transcription factors.

Text 18
10.1016/j.stem.2016.10.003
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 2. separation of two distinct lmx1a-positive and one lmx1a-negative pseudotime axes (a) (i) cells are colored as in figure 1b. the monocle’s pseudotime trajectory is depicted by a thick black line traversing though a sprawling minimum spanning tree. (ii) the cell density is plotted along pc1 and colored by pseudotime. blue: early pseudotime and red: late pseudotime. (b) (i–iii) euclidean distance heatmap of cells based on spearman correlation when considering the lineage intersect gene list. the clustering tree (left and top) divides into four main branches (i’: early lmx1a-positive cluster; ii’: late lmx1a-positive cluster; iii’: early lmx1a-negative cluster; and iv’: late lmx1a-negative cluster). the right hand bars indicate cells’ pseudotime age (blue: early and red: late), facs classification (green: gfp-positive and gray: gfp-negative), and assignment into either lmx1a-positive (green) or lmx1a-negative (red) lineages. (ii) the expression of mesda markers in lmx1a-negative (red) and lmx1apositive (green) lineages is shown. (iii) the expression of non-dopaminergic vmd markers in lmx1a-negative (red) and lmx1a-positive (green) lineages is shown. (c) t-sne network plot shows a left-to-right distribution of cells roughly conforming to their established pseudotime order. blue: early pseudotime and red: late pseudotime. (d) cells plotted as in (c). the assignment to either lmx1a-positive (green) or lmx1a-negative (red) lineages from figure 2b i is indicated. the t-sne plot separates into two parallel lmx1a-positive axes (axis-1 and axis-2) and one lmx1a-negative axis (lmx1a-neg). (e) t-sne plots displaying expression of known mesda markers.']. Reference sentences:[the monocle-derived pseudotime differentiation axis matched very closely with pc1 (figure 2a) showing the same distribution of cell age.spearman correlation clustering based on this gene set strongly divided into four main branches: two progenitor and two post-mitotic branches as indicated by the cells’ pseudotime values (figure 2b i).scatterplots depicting gene expression across these two groups confirmed our clustering with mesda neuron-specific genes including lmx1a lmx1b corin wnt1 th and pitx3 expressed at high levels in the lmx1a-positive group (figure 2b ii).conversely gli1 dlx1 gad1 lhx5 gata2 and isl1 were expressed at high levels in the lmx1a-negative group indicating as expected that non-dopaminergic neurons such as oculomotor neurons and gabaergic interneurons are included in this cluster (figure 2b iii).surprisingly however multiple classic dopa- minergic markers including corin msx2 en1 and pitx3 were confined to only axis-1 (figure 2e ii).]
Summary: Trajectory analysis reveals distinct pseudotime axes, lineage-specific gene expression patterns, and separation of cell clusters based on pseudotime progression.

Text 19
10.1073/pnas.1621412114
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 1. directed differentiation at single-cell resolution. (a) theoretical and (b) experimental framework to study cell differentiation as a transition between attractors. before transition (time t0): cells in state a (local minima in a quasipotential landscape) are defined by a distinct grn state (expressed and nonexpressed genes are colored and gray, respectively). the state a attractor manifests as either a dense cloud of points in a high-dimensional cell-state space (as measured using single-cell qpcr) or a tight, uniform distribution of a single gene/dimension (as measured by flow cytometry) as shown in b. the tipping point (time t1): the attractor destabilizes (via changes in the quasipotential landscape), and cells become primed toward a future attractor state(s). cells in the poised state a’ exhibit increased cell diversity, which manifests as a shift in the high-dimensional state space or a wider distribution in a single dimension. posttransition (time t2): stable states b and c emerge through the stabilization of mutually exclusive grn states that can be observed as two clouds occupying distinct positions in the highdimensional cell-state space or bimodal distribution of the marker gene as shown in b. (c) snapshot of the ipsc to icm differentiation protocol used in this study. asterisks mark the perturbation time points (days 0, 1, and 3) that also correspond to cell culture media exchanges. (d) diffusion map (dm) of the ipsc to icm differentiation based on 1,934 single-cell gene expression vectors of 96 genes. color of each dot represents the day of collection during differentiation. arrows indicate the direction of cell-state trajectories. the dashed arrow points toward the undesired cell state. (e) dynamics of state-specific transcription factors. the violin plots show the variability of gene expression (log2ex) across each cell population for five transcription factors: nanog (stem cell marker), gsc (ps marker), mesp1 (posterior ps/cardiac mesoderm marker), gata4 (mesoderm and endoderm marker), and tbx2 (cardiac marker).']. Reference sentences:[for instance single-cell resolution analyses have shown that cell types form discrete clusters when gene ex- pression patterns are visualized in a low-dimensional space using for example principle component analysis or t-distributed sto- chastic neighbor-embedding plots (3 6) (fig 1 a and b).a cell fate transition then corresponds to a switching between distinct attractors via transient unstable states and can be analyzed as coordinated shift of gene expression in a low-dimensional cell- state space (8) (fig 1 a and b).this response is akin to flattening of the valley in the landscape which facilitates exit from the attractor state until at a critical point the pluripotency attractor suddenly vanishes providing access to two alternative cell fate attractors (fig 1 a and b).a standard method for induced pluripotent stem cell- derived cardiomyocytes (icms) differentiation (fig 1c) con- sisting of the sequential treatment of ipscs with cytokines and other molecules that induce cardiac mesoderm in vivo was used: activin a (day 0) bmp4 (bone morphogenetic protein 4) com- bined with a wnt pathway activator (day 1) and a wnt antag- onist (day 3) mimicking at least partially the differentiation signals that epiblast (e) cells are exposed to during heart de- velopment in vivo (13 17 18).to reconstruct the ipsc to icm differentiation trajectory and identify lineage branch points we measured transcript expres- sion of the selected genes in ∼1900 individual differentiating cells obtained during the first 6 days of differentiation (fig 1d fig s2 and dataset s2).a major lineage branching took place at day 3 when individual cells transitioned from a multipotent primitive streak (ps)-like progenitor state to either a more dif- ferentiated mesodermal (m) state or an endodermal (en) state as indicated by lineage-specific transcripts (fig 1e).however fig 1.]
Patterns related to cell fate transitions and attractors are visualized in low-dimensional space, showing gene expression shifts between distinct states.

Text 20
10.1073/pnas.1621412114
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 4. cell-state diversity at the tipping point predicts differentiation efficiency. (a) perturbation scheme to influence the m–en branching event on day 3. in total, we tested 15 bmp4/gsk3 inhibitor combinations highlighted with a unique color or number in a circle across all panels herein. (b) dynamics of the ckit distribution during early differentiation reflect the effect of each small molecule combination. we observed different ckit distributions on days 2 and 3 for each treatment (flow cytometry data shown in fig s8), which inform predictions about protocol efficiency as measured by the proportion of ctnnt2+ cells—the most commonly used molecules to show the cardiac fate—on day 28 (shown in striped boxes). (c) projections of the 100-cell pool ckithigh, ckitmedium, and ckitlow gene expression profiles onto the diffusion map (dm). the single-cell gene expression profiles are shown in gray, and combination-specific, population-specific pooled gene expression vectors are represented with the corresponding colors from a. the position in the trajectory at day 2 as well as the variable distribution of ckit outlier fractions (shown as numbers in boxes above histograms) can explain huge variation in the efficiencies of the protocols (measured as ctnnt2+ cells at day 28). (d) random forest analysis to identify transcripts or cell subpopulations that predict high- vs. low-efficiency protocols. we classified every combination that produces >60% icms as high efficiency (dark blue), whereas any combination with efficiency <60% was classified as low efficiency (orange). (e) the ckithigh, ckitmedium, and ckitlow concatenated gene expression vectors outperform the ckitmedium vector classification. hand1 gene expression in ckithigh and ckitlow populations discriminates between three different combinations with different efficiencies (marked by asterisks), whereas sox17 and hand1 gene expression in ckitmedium population is the same. (f) correlation plots for signaling molecules and combination class (low vs. high efficiency). low-efficiency protocols are marked by lower dosages of exogenous bmp4 (<2.5 μm), but it seems that there is no correlation between exogenous administration and endogenous bmp4 levels (measured as gene expression; no correlation). however, higher dosages of exogenous bmp4 are highly correlated with the expression levels of dkk1 and wnt5b in the ckitlow population that will commit to the cardiac cell fate. again, ckithigh or ckitlow gene expression vectors perform better than ckitmedium.']. Reference sentences:[to test the idea that the cell population structure at this tip- ping point sets the course of the long-term trajectory and can predict the efficiency of differentiation into future states we varied the protocol for differentiation by gradually modulating the concentration for the two inducers bmp4 and wnt pathway activator (glycogen synthase kinase 3 (gsk3) inhibitor) (mate- rials and methods and fig 4a).we then monitored the structure of the differentiating cell populations with respect to five state- specific surface markers and the final efficiency of icm differ- entiation (fig 4 a and b and fig s8).the m–en branching at day 3 took place in the absence of any exogenous signals (no bmp4/no gsk3 inhibitor) suggesting that activin a-induced ipscs are in a transient unstable state driven by the endogenous tgf-β/bmp and wnt pathways to undergo a critical state transition (fig 4 b and c).using a random forest classification to extract genes that are associated with low- or high-efficiency treatments we identify a molecular signature at the tipping point that predicted whether the efficiency of cardiomyocyte differentiation at day 28 was high (>70% icms) or low (<70% icms) (fig 4d).importantly we achieved a better classification when we used the information afforded by the gene expression of the populations fractions ckithigh-ckitmedium-ckitlow separately (concatenated gene expression vectors) compared with just the gene expression of the ckitmedium fraction (fig 4 d–f and dataset s1 table s5) corroborating the informative potential of the ckit outliers.however we could identify cases where signaling inter- actions with predictive power were either exclusively seen (wnt5b) or better detected (i.e. pdgfra) in the outlier fractions (fig 4f).m en 27% e f 57% #cells d1 1 12 40 50 60 70 80 30 50 70 90 % predicted efficiency % measured efficiency class 1: low efficiency class 2: high efficiency 0 4 8 log2ex 10 hand1-h hand1-l hand1-m sox17-m 12 3 45 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 class 1: low efficiency class 2: high efficiency efficiency (%icm) log2ex r = -0.06 r = 0.28 r = 0.11 r = 0.38 r = 0.85 r = 0.52 r = 0.54 r = 0.77 r = 0.83 dkk1 wnt5b pdgfra r = 0.17 r = 0.70 r = 0.67 bmp4 ckit high ckit medium ckit low fig 4.]
Patterns related to the trajectory of differentiation efficiency can be predicted by the distribution of gene expressions in different cell populations.

Text 21
10.1038/ni.3688
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 7 ezh2 mediates the effector differentiation of cd8+ t lymphocytes through epigenetic repression. (a) expression (averaged normalized tpm values) of genes encoding products in the three inferred differentiation pathways (effector, tcm or tem; inferred as in fig 4d), classified as genes marked (targeted) or not marked (not targeted) by h3k27me3 (key), assessed in cells obtained as in figure 1 (horizontal axes). (b) chip-seq analysis of the binding of ezh2 and h3k27me3 at eomes, foxo1, klf2 and tcf7 (gray indicates input); arrowheads indicate binding peaks for ezh2 (red) or h3k27me3 (blue). (c,d) temporal expression patterns (time relative to infection as in fig 1) of selected memory-cell-associated genes encoding products linked to cd8+ t cell differentiation, targeted by ezh2 (c) or not (d), in inferred paths of differentiation for effector cells, tcm cells and tem cells (key); shaded areas, 95% confidence interval (bootstrapped from all possible single-cell expression trajectories). (e) h3k27me3 coverage (key) for individual genes in ezh2fl/flcd4+/+ (wt) and ezh2fl/flcd4cre (ko) cells. (f) h3k27me3 coverage in ezh2fl/flcd4+/+ and ezh2fl/flcd4cre cells (two biologic replicates each (1, 2)), presented as quantification of h3k27me3 binding peaks (left) or regions (right). (g) h3k27me3 coverage of memorycell-associated genes targeted by ezh2, in ezh2fl/flcd4cre cd8+ t cells relative to that in ezh2fl/flcd4+/+ cd8+ t cells (ko/wt). (h) h3k27me3 coverage (ratio as in g) plotted against rna expression (of all genes) in ezh2fl/flcd4cre cd8+ t cells relative to that in ezh2fl/flcd4+/+ cd8+ t cells. (i) temporal expression patterns (as in c) of selected genes associated with effector differentiation. data are representative of two experiments.']. Reference sentences:[]
Summary: Trajectory patterns of gene expression and epigenetic regulation in CD8+ T cell differentiation pathways.

Text 22
10.1038/ni.3688
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 4 identification of putative regulators of the differentiation of cd8+ t lymphocytes. (a) overlap (middle) of genes expressed differentially by div1te cells relative to their expression by div1mem cells (left) and those expressed differentially by terminally differentiated effector t cells (tte cells) relative to their expression by memory t cells (tmem cells) (right) (all cells obtained as in fig 1). (b) plotting of the difference in expression of genes expressed differentially by effector cells versus memory cells (as in a; tte/tmem) against that of genes expressed differentially by div1te cells versus div1mem cells (div1te/div1mem). pearson correlation, r = 0.78 (p = 3.6 × 10−13). each symbol represents an individual gene. (c) differential expression of 89 common genes (one per row) by all cd8+ t lymphocyte populations of naive cells (gray), div1te cells (red), div1mem cells (blue), day 4 cells (orange), day 7 cells (yellow), tcm cells (green) and tem cells (purple) (one cell per column); left margin (brackets), hierarchical clustering. (d) temporal expression patterns of selected genes across inferred paths of differentiation for effector cells (orange), tcm cells (purple) and tem cells (green); shaded areas, 95% confidence interval (bootstrapped from all possible single-cell expression trajectories). data are representative of two experiments.']. Reference sentences:[]
Summary: Trajectory patterns of gene expression during differentiation of CD8+ T lymphocytes, showing temporal changes across different cell types.

Text 23
10.1126/sciimmunol.aal2192
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 5. temporal gene expression dynamics during pcas infection. (a) expression patterns over pseudotime shown for top 2061 dynamic genes (defined by d statistic >50). genes are ordered per peak expression time. th1 and tfh probability trajectories from the gpfates omgp model presented at the bottom to depict bifurcation and provide temporal context between the gene expressions and cellular fates. various dynamically expressed immune receptors, transcription factors, and secreted molecules are annotated. (b) relationship of transcriptional activity and divergence of th1 and tfh fates. the number of detected genes per cell is shown across pseudotime. the color of the data points represents trend assignment probability (fig.2). th1 and tfh trajectories from the gpfates omgp model presented to depict relation to the bifurcating behavior. (c) gene expression dynamics assessed using d statistic and optimal squared exponential kernel length-scales. genes with a d statistic of >50 selected as displaying nonlinear expression patterns over pseudotime. the optimal length-scales of the squared exponential kernels of the gaussian processes plotted on x axis, where small values indicate that some rapid changes in expression over pseudotime occur. (d) model summarizing the expression patterns of key chemokine receptors and the transcription factors id2 and tcf7 during th1-tfh cell fate determination. the size of the cell represents proliferative capacity (fig.4, a to f).']. Reference sentences:[on the basis of the d statistic (>50.0 fig 5c) we identified 2061 dynamic genes (fig 5a).second we ordered these genes accord- ing to their peak expression time to pro- vide a temporal overview (fig 5a) and noted that a substantial fraction of them peaked around bifurcation.moreover cells around bifurcation also transcribed the highest number of genes compared with those at all other points in pseudotime (fig 5b).this model also infers the length-scale of the dynamic model namely the degree of fast-acting behavior over pseudotime (fig 5c).2 eaal2192 (2017) 3 march 2017 scie n c e i m m u no lo gy | r esea r ch articl e 6 of 11 th1/tfh fate (fig 5d).gpfates modeling fig 5.]
Summary: Patterns of gene expression dynamics and cell fate determination during bifurcation in pseudotime trajectory.

Text 24
10.1126/sciimmunol.aal2192
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 2. gpfates modeling of bifurcation processes using scrna-seq data. (a) overview of the analysis workflow that underlies gpfates, consisting of dimensionality reduction of high-dimensional single-cell transcriptomes (left), inference of a pseudotemporal ordering of the cells (middle), and the reconstruction of trajectories using temporal mixture modeling (right). these individual steps build on models derived using the gaussian process framework. once fitted, gpfates enables for different downstream analyses, including cell orderings, bifurcation time point estimates, and inference of the genes that drive bifurcation events. (b) illustration of intermediate results obtained from gpfates. left: a low-dimensional representation, as well as a pseudotemporal ordering of the cells, is inferred using a nonlinear dimensionality reduction (gaussian process latent variable model). temporal trajectories and bifurcations are then reconstructed using a temporal mixture model (overlapping mixture of gaussian processes), with data-trend assignments per cell. b-gplvm, bayesian gaussian process latent variable model; 3d, three-dimensional. (c) low-\\xad dimensional representation (2d) of the complete data sets (408 single-cell transcriptomes). the blue line depicts the inferred progression of pseudotime. text labels illustrate features typical of cells in the corresponding pseudotime region. (d) inference of two simultaneous trends based on the pseudotime using the temporal mixture model.']. Reference sentences:[briefly this approach is based on first reconstructing the differentiation trajectory from the observed data (“pseudotime” fig 2 a and b) thereby establishing an order for the cells.this ap- proach revealed two simultaneous trends emerging during pseudotime (fig 2 c and d) which separated from each other indicating that a developmental bifurcation occurred.the cell fate split appeared to initiate among early day 4 post-infection cells (in pseudotime; fig 2 c and d) an inference that was robust when using bootstrapped subsets of cells (section 6.2 of supplementary computational methods).consistent with this was the observed fig 2.the color of the data points represents trend assignment probability (fig 2).]
Summary: Inference of cell trajectories and bifurcation events using pseudotime analysis, revealing simultaneous trends and bifurcation initiation.

Text 25
10.1126/sciimmunol.aal2192
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 3. the relationship of known th1 and tfh transcriptomic signatures and the gpfates trajectories. (a) th1 and tfh assignment probabilities of individual cells. for differential expression analysis (b), th1 and tfh were defined as cells with assignment probability of ≥0.8 for the respective trend. (b) differential expression patterns between cells assigned to th1 and tfh states. fold differences (x axis) and the corresponding adjusted p value (y axis) of differential expression for expressed genes (in at least 20% of cells) are shown. statistical significance was determined using wilcoxon rank sum test, with benjamini and hochberg correction for multiple testing. the horizontal and vertical dashed lines denote adjusted p value of 0.05 and twofold change, respectively. (c) parallel th1 and tfh differentiation within cells of a single cd4+ t cell clone. colors correspond to individual clones determined by sequence analysis of endogenous tcr genes (tables s2 and s3). (d) identification of genes associated with th1 and tfh trajectories. for each gene, the expression correlation with pseudotime (x axis) versus the correlation with the tfh trend assignment (y axis) is shown. gene relevance was deter- of the dynamic model, namely, the degree mined using the bifurcation statistic (materials and methods, fig s9c). the top 248 bifurcating genes, with bifurcation statistic >49, are represented in colors according to the functional classification of the genes (supplementary materials and methods and table s4). (e) genes with the strongest association with th1 or tfh differentiation, filtered using the bifurcation score as in (d). the genes are ranked in descending order of association with the respective trend. cdk2ap2 appears twice because of alternative genomic annotations. (f) web address for gpfates database, where the expression kinetics of genes of interest can be visualized. examples illustrate the top-ranking bifurcating genes from (e).']. Reference sentences:[we found that differentially expressed genes between the identi- fied trajectories agreed with known th1/tfh signature genes (fig 3 a and b and fig s9) (15) strongly suggesting that the fitted mixture components corresponded to cells with th1 and tfh phenotypes.for the remaining four clones siblings exhibited highly diverging patterns of differentiation with three sibling pairs fall- ing at the extremities of the th1-tfh phenotype spectrum (fig 3c).we derived a bifurcation statistic to esti- mate the concordance with bifurcation for individual genes (see sec- tion 4.2 of supplementary computational methods for details and fig 3d).among the highest-ranking genes the most common pattern was up-regulation along the th1 branch (fig 3d).the highest-ranking transcription factors for the bifurcation in- cluded tcf7 for the tfh fate and id2 for the th1 fate (fig 3 d and e).given that cxcr5 and cxcr3 have been associated with tfh and th1 cells respectively (10 33 34) and because they exhibited similar dynamics we hypothe- sized that these were competing receptors that directly influenced fig 3.]
Summary: Identification of genes associated with differentiation trajectories, including known th1/tfh signature genes, using bifurcation statistic and expression correlation with pseudotime.

Text 26
10.1038/ncb3493
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 1 experimental strategy. adult human hspcs were stained with antibodies against up to 11 surface markers and individually sorted for either single-cell rna-seq or single-cell cultures. data from the two experiments were then integrated on the basis of surface marker expression to reconstruct developmental trajectories of haematopoiesis.']. Reference sentences:[the surface marker fluorescence intensities of all markers were recorded to retrospectively reconstruct immunophenotypes (cd10 cd38 cd45ra cd90 cd135 and depending on the experiment cd2 cd7 cd49f cd71 cd130 fcer1a itga5 and kel supplementary fig 1a).such index-sorted hspcs derived from the bone marrow of two healthy individuals were subjected to rna-seq analysis (‘index- omics’ 1034 and 379 single cells; see supplementary fig 1b for the distribution of cells within classically defined gates56 and supplementary fig 2 for quality metrics of single-cell rna-seq) to determine their transcriptomes or individually cultured ex vivo (‘index-culture’ 2038 single cells) to quantify megakaryocytic erythroid and myeloid lineage potential.subsequently the functional and transcriptomic data sets were integrated by regression models using commonly indexed surface marker expression to identify the molecular and cellular events associated with the diﬀerentiation of human hscs at the single-cell level (fig 1).in contrast lin−cd34+cd38+ cells emerged into bone marrow aspirate 11-colour index facs sort single-cell rna-seq inference of developmental trajectories index-omics rnaseq data facs marker identification of new cell types reconstruction of human haematopoiesis data integration single-cell cultures index-cultures function facs marker functional characterization of cell types figure 1 experimental strategy.note that the cd38+ and cd38− gates were set to touch (see also supplementary fig 1a).note that the cd38+ and cd38− gates were set to touch (see also supplementary fig 1a).in individual 1 we further excluded 13 cells with an abnormal cd38−cd90high immunophenotype (supplementary fig 1a).doi: 10.1038/ncb3493 0 103 104 105 0 103 104 105 28.5 30.7 0 103 104 105 0 103 104 105 15.7 34.2 0 103 104 105 0 103 104 105 24.3 52.6 21.9 0 103 104 105 0 103 104 105 91.8 7.94 0 103 104 105 0 103 104 105 11.5 5.57 0 50k 100k 150k 200k 250k 0 103 104 105 28.8 0 50k 100k 150k 200k 250k 0 50k 100k 150k 200k 250k 99.2 0 50k 100k 150k 200k 250k 0 50k 100k 150k 200k 250k 39.9 fsc fsc fsc-h ssc fsc-a lineage cd34 cd45ra cd45ra cd38 cd10 cd135 cd49f cd45ra cd45ra cd90 cd90 cd10 b-nk hsc mpp gmp cmp mep mlp 0 103 104 105 0 103 104 105 20.1 79.9 32.7 a                                                    cd49f+ hsc: 16 cells cd49f fsc-a                                           cd49f+ hsc: 13 cells cd49f fsc-a                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          lin−cd34+cd38− 145 cells cd34 cd38+                                                                                                                                             stringent hsc gate: 46 cd45ra individual 1 individual 2 cd90                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       cd34+cd38−: 119 cells cd34 cd38                                                                                                           stringent hsc gate: 52 cells cd45ra cd90 b cmp mep gmp b-nk mlp mpp hsc cells between gates 46 52 22 11 33 12 12 13 43 10 14 203 147 94 224 (60%) 477 (46%) population (according to doulatov et al 2010) number of cells individual 2 number of cells individual 1 supplementary figure 1 flow cytometric display of the setup used for in- dex-omics.]
Summary: Reconstruction of developmental trajectories in hematopoiesis based on surface marker expression in single cells.

Text 27
10.1038/nbt.3854
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 2 comparison of algorithms for ordering cellular states. (a) a noisy, branched, asynchronous cellular differentiation process was simulated. the differentiation tree of the process is represented. 700 cells were sampled from this process at three time points. using these data, we attempted to reconstruct the structure of the differentiation tree with sctda and compared the outcomes with reconstruction using diffusion pseudotime, slicer and wishbone, all of which rely on branch assignments for downstream statistical analysis. (b) reconstructed differentiation trajectory using sctda. sctda recovered the structure of the simulated differentiation process and correctly rooted the tree using the experimental information. nodes correspond to sets of cells sharing similar global transcriptional profiles, with the node sizes proportional to the number of cells in the node. nodes that are connected by an edge have at least one cell in common. for reference, an inset with the latent mds representation of the data, colored by sampling day, is also shown. (c) reconstructed differentiation trajectory using diffusion pseudotime. although the representation of the data using the first two diffusion coefficients reproduces the structure of the differentiation tree, the branch associations are not correctly assigned. (d) reconstructed differentiation trajectory using slicer. the representation constructed by slicer using locally linear embedding was unable to capture the complete structure of the differentiation tree and branch assignments. (e) reconstructed differentiation trajectory using wishbone. the t-sne representation of the data used by wishbone reproduces the structure of the differentiation tree and correctly identifies the first branching point. however, wishbone failed to identify the second branching point. (f,g) pearson’s correlation coefficient between the pseudotime, inferred from the sctda data, diffusion pseudotime (d. pt), slicer, and wishbone, and the actual simulated differentiation time. cellular differentiation processes with one, two, or three branching points were considered, both in the absence (f) and in the presence (g) of dropout events.']. Reference sentences:[]
Summary: Reconstruction of differentiation trajectories using different algorithms, comparing accuracy in capturing branching points and assigning cells to correct branches.

Text 28
10.1038/nbt.3854
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 1 topological analysis of longitudinal single-cell rna-seq data. (a) comparison of methods for reducing dataset dimensionality. a toy example is shown, illustrating the artifacts that can emerge when standard dimensional-reduction methods are used to represent differentiation trajectories. a total of 1,000 points are sampled from a twisted circle in 3d space. mds, ica, t-sne, and mapper were used to represent the above points in two dimensions. of these methods, only mapper can capture the continuous circular trajectory of the 3d space without introducing artificial intersections or disrupting the trajectory. (b) mapper algorithm. top: mapper builds upon dimensional-reduction function f mapping the high-dimensional singlecell rna-seq point-cloud data into e052k (for simplicity we take k = 1 in this figure). bottom: under the inverse function f −1, a covering of e052k maps into a covering of the single-cell point-cloud data. clustering is performed independently in each of the induced patches in the high-dimensional space. in the low-dimensional representation, a node is assigned to each cluster of cells. if two clusters intersect, the corresponding nodes are connected by an edge. topological features in the low-dimensional representation are guaranteed to also be present in the original high-dimensional rna-seq space. (c) gene connectivity. gene connectivity allows the identification of genes that are differentially expressed by a cellular subpopulation of the differentiation process, without predefining any cellular subpopulation. represented is a toy example of two genes with very different gene connectivity on the topological representation. top: an example of a gene with high gene connectivity in the topological representation. this signifies that there is a set of cells with similar global expression profiles and high expression levels of the gene. bottom: an example of a gene with low gene connectivity in the topological representation. (d) gene centroid. the centroid of a gene, measured in pseudotime, quantifies where the expression of a gene sits in the topological representation with respect to the root node. the root node represents the least differentiated cellular state and is determined from the experimental sampling times. a toy example of two genes with very different centroid can be used to illustrate the concept. top: a gene with a low value for the expression centroid mostly associated with pluripotent cells. bottom: a gene with a high value for the centroid, mostly associated with differentiated cells. (e) transient cellular states. transient cellular states can be identified in an unsupervised manner by clustering low-dispersion genes with significant gene connectivity according to their centroid in the topological representation. in the figure, an example of distribution of centroids and dispersions for genes with significant gene connectivity is shown. four clusters of low-dispersion genes are identified, which correspond to four transient cellular states arising throughout the differentiation process.']. Reference sentences:[]
Summary: Identification of differentiation trajectories using topological analysis of single-cell RNA-seq data, including gene connectivity, centroid, and transient cellular states.

Text 29
10.1016/j.stem.2017.04.003
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 2. statistical analysis of single-cell rna-seq data predicts distinct cell states and branchpoints in the olfactory stem cell trajectory (a and b) t-sne plot (perplexity = 10) based on the 500 most variable genes showing the separation of the cells into discrete groups congruent with the clustering. in (a), each circle represents a cell. cluster medoids are displayed as larger circles with initial assignments of cluster identity based on the expression of a small number of marker genes (b). (c) t-snes as in (a) and (b) and colored by experimental condition. differentiation is asynchronous, but cells from the later lineage tracing time points and the sox2-egfp+ cells contribute to more differentiated cell types.']. Reference sentences:[to visualize cellular heterogeneity we projected the data onto two dimen- sions via t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding (t-sne; van der maaten and hinton 2008) which confirms that our clus- tering procedure led to well defined distinct groups (figure 2a).preliminary cell type assignments were made based on the expression of known and/or validated marker genes for hbcs gbcs immediate neuronal precursors (inp1-3) immature and mature olfactory sensory neurons (iosns and mosns) imma- ture and mature sustentacular cells (isus and msus) and micro- villous cells (mv1 and mv2) (figure 2b; figure s2; see star methods for details).sox2-egfp cells populate all clusters except those predicted to comprise the earliest hbc stages immature sustentacular cells and mature olfactory sensory neurons (figure 2; figure s2).]
Cellular heterogeneity in olfactory stem cell trajectory, visualized by t-SNE plot based on gene expression, reveals distinct cell states and branchpoints.

Text 30
10.1016/j.cub.2017.05.028
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 1. dynamics of gene expression heterogeneity during early dictyostelium differentiation (a) single-cell rna-seq was carried out on 0-, 3-, and 6-hr differentiated cells. three replicates were carried out at each stage. (b) the relationship between variance (cv2) and mean (read counts) of transcript levels in single 0-hr cells. the 7,670 genes (dots) with more than ten mean counts per cell are shown, with a running median in red. (c) global noise increases during development. data show the running medians from the three time points, averaged over all replicates. (d) the cv2 distribution for each time point is shown as box-and-whiskers plots, with the white line denoting the median. (e) no branches in developmental trajectories were detected by monocle. cells, colored by time point, are shown in the first two components’ space attained by independent component analysis. the black line shows the longest identified path through the minimal spanning tree. see also figure s1 and data s1.']. Reference sentences:[we sequenced the transcriptomes of 433 cells over three time points: 0 (undifferentiated cells) 3 and 6 hr (at the onset of multi-cellularity) (figure 1a) in triplicate.to visualize transcript variability the transcript variance (cv2 the squared coefficient of variation) was plotted against the mean expression (figure 1b).global transcript variability increases during differentiation; the whole gene cloud displayed in figure 1b shifted vertically (figures 1c and 1d).the first method monocle [8] detected no branching of the develop- mental trajectory (figure 1e) despite reliably ordering cells by well-known developmental markers (figure s1b).however a more detailed analysis was required because downregulated genes tended to have lower read counts than up- regulated genes so that based on the mean-variance trend in the gene cloud (figure 1b) a lower expressed gene would likely be more variable by default.comparing transcript variance to figure 1.to simulate an entire transcriptome we specified distributions of possible values of burst frequency and size based on in vivo measurements [6 7 19 20] such that the combined inﬂuence of frequency and size generated the properties of the experi- mental data in figure 1b.]
Summary: Trajectory analysis of gene expression heterogeneity during cell differentiation, showing global noise increase and absence of branching in developmental trajectories.

Text 31
10.1016/j.cell.2017.05.035
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure s7. additional data visualization of single-cell expression patterns, related to figure 6 (a) the trajectory analyses of cd8+ and cd4+ t cells by other trajectory inference methods embeddr, scorpius and tscan, with the same datasets and dispersed gene set as those used in monocle 2.0. each dot corresponds to a single cell, and each color represents a t cell cluster. the black dotted lines show the state transitional trajectories. (b) we developed a web-based tool for interactive online data analysis, visualization, and downloading for user-inputted single or multiple genes, based on the underlying hcc infiltrating t cell data.']. Reference sentences:[]
Summary: Visualization of trajectory patterns in t cell clusters using different trajectory inference methods and a web-based tool for interactive data analysis.

Text 32
10.1016/j.cels.2017.08.009
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 1. differentiation in vitro recapitulates development in vivo (a) schematic of the experimental design. (b) immunostaining for pluripotency markers oct4 and nanog from cells at the start of the experiment (left panels, scale bars 50 mm) and neuronal markers tubb3b and sox1 at the end of the experiment (right panels, scale bars 200 mm). (c) comparison of global gene expression profiles with a training library shows loss of pluripotency characteristics and progressive gain of neuronal characteristics. comparisons with the 20 most similar/dissimilar lineages are shown. the full comparison is shown in figure s2. (d) loss of pluripotency markers and gain of neuronal lineage markers assessed by rt-pcr. (e) single-cell data show a gradual drift from the esc state to the npc state. (f) projection of the data onto the first two principal components reveals the presence of a transient intermediate state during differentiation. color indicates sampling time. solid lines show mean trajectories for each cell line. (g) gene loadings for the first two principal components indicates that the intermediate state is a primed epiblast-like state. throughout this figure, data for the r1 cell line are given in blue, and data for the e14 cell line are given in purple.']. Reference sentences:[to determine the global molecular dynamics of differentiation mrna expression changes were assessed via microarray of bulk cell material and morphological and protein expression changes were examined by immunostaining (figure 1a).for instance expression of otx2 a transcription factor expressed in both primed pluripotent cells (acampora et al. 2013) and in the developing anterior brain (simeone et al. 1992) occurred only transiently during the first 48 hr of differentiation in e14 cells while expression was sus- tained in r1 cells (figure 1d).concomitant with this expression of gbx2 an antagonist otx2 during the formation of the mid/ hindbrain junction (millett et al. 1999; broccoli et al. 1999) was subsequently induced in e14 but not in r1 cells (figure 1d) suggesting a slight specification bias intrinsic to each cell line (see also figure s1i).cell systems 5 268–282 september 27 2017 269 a b c e f g d figure 1.(legend continued on next page) cell systems 5 268–282 september 27 2017 271 hierarchical clustering of the data largely captured the natural ordering by sampling time indicating a gradual progression of cellular identities away from the esc state toward the npc state (figure 1e).dimensionality reduction using principal component (pc) analysis suggested that cells do not move directly from the esc state to the npc state but rather pass through a transitory intermediate state characterized by particular combinatorial pat- terns of gene expression (figure 1f).analysis of the contribution of the gene loadings to each of the first two pcs revealed that the dynamics may be decomposed into two distinct molecular pro- cesses (figure 1g): pc1 associates with the transition from the ground state of pluripotency toward the neuronal lineages (reg- ulators of the ground state esc identity such as pou5f1 nanog esrrb zfp42 klf4 tbx3 nr0b1 and myc are negatively associ- ated with this component; while genes associated with the npc identity such as nestin rai1 pax6 and cdh2 are positively associated); while pc2 associates with the process of epiblast maturation (regulators of the primed epiblast that forms the egg cylinder such as otx2 fgf5 cd34 and cldn6 as well as generic epigenetic regulators such as utf1 and dnmt3b are posi- tively associated with this component; while characteristic neuronal genes such as vim and tubb3 are negatively associ- ated) (see figure 1g).]
Summary: Single-cell trajectories show a gradual transition from one state to another, passing through an intermediate state with specific gene expression patterns.

Text 33
10.7554/eLife.26945
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 3. dp and sp induce distinct differentiation paths to the motor neuron state. (a) visualization of differentiation paths for both protocols using spring reveals two paths to the same state. dp and sp overlap during early neural commitment, but then bifurcate and converge to the same final mn state separately. reds = direct programming path; blues = standard protocol path; arrows indicate hypothezed differentiation trajectories. cell states are colored and labeled by according to their definition in figure 1 for comparison. (b) gene expression of key marker genes along each differentiation path confirms exit from the pluripotent state (oct4) and progression towards the mn state (tubb3, stmn2) for both protocols. only the sp upregulates olig2 and nkx6-1, which mark important mn lineage intermediates in the embryo; this occurs following the bifurcation of both paths. expression in cells from each sample are colored using either a blue (esc), red (dp), or green (sp) colormap to allow tracking of each path separately. (c) pairwise cosine similarity of cell state centroids. note early and late similarity of states, but prominent differences during intermediate state transitions. (d) every individual cell of the dp trajectory was assigned to its most similar sp state using a maximum likelihood method. dp cells map to early and late but not intermediate states of the sp cell state progression. doi: https://doi.org/10.7554/elife.26945.009 the following figure supplements are available for figure 3:']. Reference sentences:[to test this idea and to gain additional emn and lmn transcriptional data we profiled an additional 1372 single cell transcriptomes from a replicate sp experiment at day 10 (figure 3—fig- ure supplement 1; supplementary methods).this representation revealed that the dp and sp trajectories overlap during early neural commitment but that they then bifurcate and take distinct paths that converge independently to the same mn state (figure 3a).the dynamics of gene expression over these trajectories resembled the behavior inferred using tsne with dp omitting intermediate pro- genitor genes following its bifurcation from the sp path (figure 3b).pairwise cosine similarities between the cell states from both tra- jectories (figure 3c; supplementary methods) indicate similarities between the early states (esc and np; cosine similarity >0.69) and late states (lmn; cosine similarity = 0.47) but not the intermedi- ate states (pnp pvnp and mnp; cosine similarity <=0.15 –0.03 and 0.04 respectively).we also assigned every individual cell along the dp path to its most similar cluster in the sp path using a maximum likelihood method (figure 3d; supplementary methods).mnx1 serves as a useful reporter in this context since its expression is local- ized precisely to the distinct intermediate populations of each differentiation path (figure 3b).figure 3b.(c) projection of the reference e13.5 pmns into the visualization from figure 3 revealed that pmns closely associate with the terminal states of both dp and sp (i).the specific steps we took to generate figure 3a are as follows.to make plots the coordi- nates from the spring representation were exported into matlab; cells were either colored by cell state (figure 3a) or gene expression (figure 3b).visualize: we chose to use a heatmap (figure 3c).the results of this analysis using pv-genes are presented in figure 3d.to gain a broad understanding of the relationship between the dp and sp trajectories to our pmn reference we initially projected pmn single cells into the pca-space used in the visualization from figure 3a (figure 5c–i).]
Distinct differentiation trajectories to the motor neuron state are visualized, showing early overlap and later divergence between direct programming and standard protocols.

Text 34
10.7554/eLife.26945
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 5. both dp and sp differentiation trajectories approach the transcriptional state of primary mns (pmns), but dp does so with higher precision. (a) tsne visualization of 874 single cell transciptomes from facs purified mnx1+ mns from embryos reveals heterogeneity within this population. to make comparisons between dp and sp with pmns we used only the subset of mnx1:gfp+ primary cells in a bona-fide mn state. see figure 5—figure supplement 1 for marker gene expression in each population. (b) comparison of average gene expression profiles for cell states along the dp and sp trajectories with pmns. in both methods similarity increases as differentiation proceeds. late dp states are the most similar to embryonic mns. (c) projection of the reference e13.5 pmns into the visualization from figure 3 revealed that pmns closely associate with the terminal states of both dp and sp (i). close examination of the terminal populations (emn, lmn) from dp and sp compared to pmns reveals heterogeneity representing state subtypes (ii). at a single cell level dp lmns were the most closely associated with e13.5 pmns; 64% of dp lmns had at least 1 pmn nearest neighbor out of its most similar 50 cells compared to 6% for sp lmns (iii). the subtypes present within terminal dp and sp populations could be annotated using marker genes. dp and sp emns express progenitor genes including mnx1, along with nkx2-2 and nkx6-1 in sp only. the major sp lmn outgroup expressed gata3, indicating a hindbrain identity. both dp lmns and pmns shared expression of the terminal mn differentiation gene ebf2. (d) systematic pairwise differential gene expression analysis between terminal dp and sp states and pmns. each panel is a volcano plot of differentially expressed transcription factors. both dp and sp lmns show limited gene expression differences to pmns. the dominant differences are positional, with dp and sp lmns lacking the most posterior hox genes. other expression differences are explained by differences in terminal state subtypes as figure 5 continued on next page']. Reference sentences:[though the majority of mnx1+ sorted cells were mns (73.8% n = 645) this population also contained glia (20.1%) fibro- blast-like cells (1.8%) and immune-type cells (1.2%; figure 5a; figure 5—figure supplement 1).global transcriptome comparisons confirmed that each state along the dp and sp differentiation paths becomes progressively more similar to pmns (figure 5b).we performed this analysis including all cells (figure 5c–i) and then including only emns lmns and pmns (figure 5c–ii).other expression differences are explained by differences in terminal state subtypes as figure 5 continued on next page briggs et al.as expected both dp and sp emns were less mature than pmns as seen by expression of the mn progenitor marker mnx1 (figure 5c–iv).one subset appeared more anterior than the spinal e13.5 pmns as indicated by expression of the hindbrain marker gata3; the second appeared less mature than pmns as indicated by residual expression of progenitor genes such as mnx1 or nkx2-2; and the final population was closely associated with pmns (figure 5c–iv).beyond individual marker genes we also systematically compared dp lmns sp lmns and pmns by pairwise differential gene expression analysis (figure 5d).these contractions could be stopped by the addition of 300 mm tubocurarine (curare) an antagonist of acetylcholine receptors figure 5 continued shown in c).first we computed the cosine simi- larity between the centroids of each cell state in both protocols and primary motor neurons (figure 5b).to gain a broad understanding of the relationship between the dp and sp trajectories to our pmn reference we initially projected pmn single cells into the pca-space used in the visualization from figure 3a (figure 5c–i).to generate a more refined visualization of how the terminal populations were related to each other we next constructed a new pc-space on emn and lmn dp and sp cells combined with pmns following the same steps of spring visualization described above (figure 5c–ii).third we performed differential gene expression analysis comparing the most mature motor neuron states from each protocol with primary hb9+ motor neurons (figure 5d).]
Patterns of differentiation trajectories approaching transcriptional state of primary cells, with late states resembling embryonic motor neurons. Limited gene expression differences between terminal states.

Text 35
10.7554/eLife.26945
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 6. validation that dp cells become functional mns despite their abnormal differentiation trajectory. (a) immunostaining of mn markers in dp mns confirming expression and correct subcellular localization of tubb3, map2, vacht, isl1, and hb9. dp mns also: b) can fire single or multiple action potentials upon stimulation, (c) show sodium and potassium channel currents, and d) are responsive to multiple mn neurotransmitters - ampa, kainate, gaba, and glycine. (e) co-culture experiments show that dp mns can induce clustering of acetylcholine receptors on muscle myotubes (indicated by a-bgt staining) and induce their contractions. the induced contractions are dependent on mn activity as they can be blocked by addition of the acetylcholine antagonist curare. doi: https://doi.org/10.7554/elife.26945.016 the following videos are available for figure 6: figure 6—video 1. contractions induced by dp mns in c2c12 myotubes. doi: https://doi.org/10.7554/elife.26945.017 figure 6—video 2. contractions induced by dp mns in es-myod myotubes. doi: https://doi.org/10.7554/elife.26945.018']. Reference sentences:[we confirmed that selected protein content matches the mrna markers by immunostaining for tubb3 map2 vacht isl1 and hb9 (figure 6a).depolarization induced single or multiple action potentials in current-clamp experiments (figure 6b).depolarizing voltage steps induced fast inward currents and slow outward currents characteristic of sodium and potassium channels respectively (figure 6c).we then tested whether our dp neurons would respond to neurotransmitters that act on mn (figure 6d).we observed clustering of acetylcholine receptors on the c2c12 myotubes near contact points with the dp neurons which can be seen with alpha-bungarotoxin (a-bgt) which binds to acetylcho- line receptors (figure 6e).we then observed regular contractions of some c2c12 myotubes that began after several days in co-culture (figure 6e figure 6—video 1).similarly we noticed that the dp mns could induce contractions in dp muscle myotubes that we previously generated with myod (figure 6—video 2) (li and kirschner 2014).]
Summary: Differentiated cells follow abnormal differentiation trajectories but still exhibit functional motor neuron characteristics, including marker expression, action potential firing, ion channel currents, neurotransmitter responsiveness, and muscle contraction induction.

Text 36
10.1016/j.stem.2017.09.003
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 6. monocle and clustering analyses reveal four cell states for a figure360 author presentation of figure 6, see the figure legend at (a) k-means clustering (n = 4) of genes exhibiting differential expression in ssea4+ hsscs versus c-kit+ spermatogonia. note: each row represents a gene, and each column represents a single cell, with columns/cells placed in pseudotime order (as defined in figure 4c). gene expression levels utilize a z score, which depicts variance from the mean. (b) hierarchical clustering of state 2 and state 3 cells from figure 6a. note: columns (cells) were re-ordered using hierarchical clustering, while genes (rows) were kept in the same order as figure 6a. these state assignments were then used to refine the identity and trajectory of the minor branches highlighted on the monocle plot in figure 4c.']. Reference sentences:[the states assignment involved subsequent hierarchical clustering shown in figure 6b.here we placed all single cells in their pseudotime order (compressing the small branches into the larger central branch) and performed k-means clustering on filtered genes (figure 6a).to examine these intermediate cells more carefully we applied hierarchical clus- tering which effectively separated these cells into two distinct states which we termed state 2 and state 3 (figure 6b).cell stem cell 21 533–546 october 5 2017 541 a b c d figure 6.]
Summary: Identification of four cell states and trajectory refinement through hierarchical clustering in single-cell data analysis.

Text 37
10.1016/j.cels.2017.10.012
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 3. p-creode analysis of single-cell mass-cytometry data generates topologies that reﬂect thymic t cell development (a) p-creode analysis of the first replicate 14-marker mass-cytometry dataset from setty et al. (2016) with pca preprocessing, representative of n = 100 runs. cell populations were manually labeled. overlay represents cd3 levels. (b and c) marker trends along p-creode trajectories with diffusion map preprocessing for cd8+ sp (b) and cd4+ sp (c) trajectories. trends are similar to results obtained by wishbone analysis and consistent with established stages of t cell differentiation. (d) t-sne analysis of the setty et al. (2016) dataset with manual annotation of clusters, including population x identified by p-creode. (e) diffusion map of the dataset depicting t cell maturation. see also figures s6 and s7.']. Reference sentences:[based on this feature p-creode identified a t cell population branching from the dn to dp transition area (figures 3a and s6a) which was also iden- tified by t-sne (figure 3d population x) but not by wishbone.without additional downstream anal- ysis diffusion map itself was able to capture the branching structure of differentiation as well as the associated protein expression dynamics (figure 3e) as previously noted for another diffusion map-based algorithm (haghverdi et al. 2015).]
Patterns of cell differentiation trajectories in t cell development, captured by p-creode analysis and diffusion map preprocessing.

Text 38
10.1016/j.cels.2017.10.012
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 7. indrop scrna-seq reveals the developmental trajectory of reg4+ secretory cells in the murine colon (a) human versus mouse b-actin transcript count by mapping to human and mouse reference genomes, respectively. each data point represents a single cell. (b) t-sne analysis of scrna-seq data demonstrating the absence of segregation of data points from two replicates. (c) t-sne analysis of murine colonic cells using scrna-seq data. cell types, as defined by clusters corresponding to specific cell type markers on the t-sne map, were manually annotated. overlay represents krt8 transcript levels. (d) overlay of selected transcripts depicting colonic cell lineages on the t-sne map generated in (c).']. Reference sentences:[in line with previous results with indrop the doublet rate ap- peared close to 0% (figure 7a).we then performed t-sne anal- ysis and observed that the data from the two replicates were largely interspersed within each other signifying minimal batch effects (figure 7b).for instance a reg4+ goblet cell branch can be seen arising from the secretory lineage (figure 7f).similar to stem cells tuft cells were also under-represented in our dataset (figure 7b).]
Summary: Trajectory analysis reveals developmental paths of secretory cells in the colon, with distinct cell lineages and minimal batch effects.

Text 39
10.1126/science.aap8809
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 2. maturation of radial glia across germinal zones. (a) schematic of early radial glia patterning. (b) heatmap of gene expression in radial glia sampled from human telencephalon, organized according to cluster. (c) wgcna reveals age-correlated modules combined into a pseudoage score. pcw, post-conception weeks. (d) pfc and v1 radial glia show a systematic difference in maturation. (e) trajectories of gene expression']. Reference sentences:[during early development the telencephalic neuroepithelium becomes regionalized by a small number of pattern- ing molecules produced at local signaling centers (9) which induce topographically distinct pat- terns of transcription factor expression in dorsal telencephalic (excitatory cortical neuron produc- ing) and ventral telencephalic (inhibitory corti- cal interneuron producing) radial glia (fig 2a).unbiased clustering highlighted a robust distinc- tion between dorsal and ventral telencephalic radial glia including reciprocal expression of pat- terning transcription factors emx1 and nkx2-1 (fig 2b).to deconvolve this axis of biological variation by using tran- scriptomic profiles we combined age-correlated gene coexpression networks to define a matura- tion score or “pseudoage.” radial glia pseudoage scores correlated strongly with the sample age (fig2candfigs.s5ands6).remarkablypseudoage trajectories between pfc and v1 radial glia dis- playedasystematicdivergence of ~3 weeks (fig 2d) revealing accelerated maturation of pfc radial glia along a common molecular program.analysis of gene expression trajectories across pseudoage further revealed that early human cortical radial glia share a conserved gene network related to wnt signaling (12) whereas genes involved in gliogenesis are up-regulated later in development (fig 2 e and f).unexpectedly early human radial glia also show enriched expression of proneural transcriptionfactorsincludingneurog2neurod6 and neurod1 (fig 2g and fig s5).to compare ra- dial glia in these laminae across maturation stages we combined gene coexpression networks cor- related with radial glia sampled from micro- dissected vz and osvz to define a lamina score or “pseudolamina” (fig 2f and fig s6).along with our previous ob- servations (21) our results indicate that multiple signaling pathways display heterogeneous acti- vation during radial glia diversification (fig 2j).]
Summary: Trajectories of gene expression in radial glia reveal systematic maturation differences, with conserved gene networks and enriched proneural transcription factors.

Text 40
10.1038/s41467-017-02001-5
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 3 computational reconstruction of differentiation processes in the mammary gland. a diffusion map of epithelial cells from the np and g time points, showing the first three diffusion components. b differentiation trajectory of the luminal compartment based on the first two diffusion components. c same plot as in b, coloured by the normalised and scaled expression values of various genes']. Reference sentences:[in contrast the luminal compartment showed a distinct structure with gradual transitions between different clusters and cells originating from a common origin (fig 3b).we found the expression of the progenitor marker aldh1a3 gradually decreased as cells progressed away from their common origin (fig 3c) which was largely composed of cells from c6 (lp).we further noted that the left arm of the differentiation trajectory terminates at c8 (avd) and shows increasing expres- sion of csn2 and glycam1 (fig 3c) consistent with a secretory phenotype.in between c6 and c8 we found cells that were mainly derived from c10 (avp fig 3b).on the right arm of the differentiation trajectory cells from c6 transitioned to c2 and c4/5 (hsp and hsd) during which the expression of esr1 and pgr increased suggesting that this branch represents differentiation towards hormone-sensing luminal cells (fig 3c).instead we argue that the epithelial cells —especially in the luminal compartment—should rather be conceptualised as being part of a continuous spectrum of differ- entiation as visualised in fig 3 and 4.first we selected all cells from the np and g time point (fig 3a) and detected the hvgs as described above.in fig 3b we then focused on the luminal compartment and recomputed the diffusion map based only on the luminal cells using the aforementioned procedure.]
Summary: Differentiation trajectory of luminal cells with gradual transitions between clusters, originating from a common origin, showing gene expression changes along the trajectory.

Text 41
10.1038/nbt.4038
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 4 mapping of transcription factor (tf) activities to specific cell types to resolve remyelination programs. (a) a schematic of tf analysis. briefly, putative tf binding sites (tfbss) were identified within all hypersensitive sites on the basis of matching position weight matrices (pwms). to identify relevant factors for a given cell type, we tested sites that showed significant differential accessibility (p < 0.05) in that cell type for enrichment of different tfbss by fisher’s exact test (corrected p < 0.2; see online methods). (b) a heat map of tf association with epigenetic subpopulations (right). each column represents a tf, and each row represents an epigenetic subpopulation (left) from the visual cortex scths-seq data (1 individual). select tfs are annotated. (c) a diffusion map pseudotime trajectory for 3,064 sndrop-seq data sets (644 opc and 2,420 oli) from the visual cortex (5 individuals) obtained with destiny (inset). data are color-coded according to the original data set annotations from clustering analysis. refined annotations based on the inferred pseudotime trajectory are indicated by boxes. (d) a heat map of selected genes involved in the remyelination program. columns represent data sets ordered by the pseudotime trajectory in c. rows represent genes ordered by association with opcs, ioli, and moli on the basis of the significance of differential upregulation in each group. (e) left, the accessibility of genes involved in remyelination programs for opc and oli scths-seq data sets from the visual cortex. right, a heat map of total promoter accessibility. each column represents a cell, and rows represent accessibility for genes differentially upregulated in opcs, ioli, and moli, respectively. (f) a heat map of tf association with stages of oli maturation. each column represents a tf, and each row represents an epigenetic subpopulation inferred from e. select tfs are annotated.']. Reference sentences:[]
Summary: Trajectory analysis of transcription factor activities in single cells during remyelination, including epigenetic subpopulations and gene expression changes over pseudotime.

Text 42
10.1016/j.celrep.2017.11.050
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 2. analysis of the neurogenic lineage (a) t-sne map representing the subclustering analysis of cells belonging to the neurogenic lineage. colors (blue and pink) refer to nscs and neural progenitors as identified in the first-level clustering, and gradients identify subclusters determined in the second-level clustering. (b) expression profile of representative genes along the pseudo-time. gene expression is shown on the y axis as transcript counts (the black line is the running mean of expression with a window size of 25 cells). each dot represents a cell and cells are highlighted in the same subcluster color gradient as in (a). cells were ordered on the x pseudo-time axis by stemid. genes are ordered based on expression gradient with respect to the pseudo-time, and they were chosen as representative examples of pseudo-timed differential expression along the transition from quiescence to activation for nscs and proliferation to differentiation for neural progenitors. (c) analysis of the neurogenic lineage using the waterfall pipeline. unsupervised clustering of the cells belonging to the neurogenic lineage (left, top) is shown. the same color code as in (a) is maintained. pca plot (left, bottom) and expression of known representative markers in the clusters (middle) allowed determining the orientation of the differentiation trajectory (gray arrow). each dot is a cell and the sizes of the dots represent the relative expression levels of the indicated transcript. pseudo-time ordering (right, top) is obtained by defining the relative position of each cell on the differentiation trajectory based on trascriptomic differences and spanning tree reconstruction. representative expression profiles of pseudo-timed-regulated genes (right, bottom) are shown. cells are colored in the same color gradient representing subclusters in the pca plot.']. Reference sentences:[the cells separated into 2 main clusters in the t-sne plot (figure 2a) nscs and neural progenitors which agrees with the first level of clustering results (see figure 1c).by inspecting temporal patterns of gene expression we found that some genes commonly used as nsc markers were not evenly expressed in the nsc subpopulation (figure 2b).this developmental progression is characterized by differential expression of specific nsc genes (figure 2b).some nsc markers instead such as sox9 were evenly expressed along nsc developmental stages (figure 2b).in agreement with previous reports (shin et al. 2015) proliferation markers were lowly expressed in the nscs and they were detected when cells entered the s-phase and started expressing progenitor markers (figure 2b).the temporal gene expression patterns within the two independent analyses showed a good similarity (figure 2c right and figure 2b).minor differences concerned the expression level of genes such as olig1 olig2 and pdgfra which showed a less pronounced expression in the earlier developmental stages (figure 3b) and 3274 cell reports 21 3271–3284 december 12 2017 figure 2.]
Summary: Trajectory analysis reveals gene expression changes along differentiation from quiescence to activation in NSCs and proliferation to differentiation in neural progenitors.

Text 43
10.1016/j.celrep.2017.11.050
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 3. analysis of the oligodendrocyte lineage (a) t-sne map representing the subclustering analysis of the cells belonging to the oligodendrocyte lineage. colors (orange and dark red) refer to opcs and mfols as identified in the first-level clustering, and gradients identify subclusters determined in the second-level clustering. (b) expression profile of representative genes along the pseudo-time. gene expression as transcript count is on the y axis and the running mean is in black. each dot represents a cell and cells are highlighted in the same color gradient representing subclusters in (a). opcs and mfols belonging to different subclusters were ordered on the x pseudo-time axis by stemid. (c) analyses using the waterfall pipeline. unsupervised clustering of the cells belonging to the oligodendrocyte lineage (left, top) is shown. the same color code as in (a) is maintained. pca plot (left, bottom) and expression of known markers in the clusters (middle) allowed determining the orientation of the differentiation trajectory (gray arrow). each dot is a cell and its size represents the expression level of the indicated transcript. representative expression profiles of pseudotimed-regulated genes (right, bottom) are shown. cells are colored in the same color gradient representing subclusters in the pca plot.']. Reference sentences:[in addition to the opcs and mfols revealed by our first clustering level we detected a small number of committed oligodendrocyte precursors (cops) (figure 3a).analysis by raceid2 clustered the opcs into 3 subclusters while the mfols appeared as a single homogeneous cluster (figure 3a).minor differences concerned the expression level of genes such as olig1 olig2 and pdgfra which showed a less pronounced expression in the earlier developmental stages (figure 3b) and 3274 cell reports 21 3271–3284 december 12 2017 figure 2.cell reports 21 3271–3284 december 12 2017 3275 of some differentiation genes such as klk6 which displayed higher expression in the later stages (figure 3b).in the transition from opcs to mfols most of the genes displayed an on/off expression pattern except for rare genes such as olig 1 and olig2 that were detected in all populations albeit at different levels (figure 3b).our results were validated by analysis using the waterfall pipeline (figure 3c).]
Summary: Trajectory analysis of oligodendrocyte lineage cells reveals differentiation patterns based on gene expression changes over pseudo-time.

Text 44
10.1038/s41556-017-0013-z
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 3 | oscillating patterns of gene expression during somitogenesis can be inferred from scrna-seq data. a, schematic of mouse somitogenesis, which proceeds along the ap axis. from the tail bud (posterior) extends the psm, which gives rise to somites (anterior). on the right, travelling waves of gene expression of oscillatory genes are shown along with signalling gradients on the ap axis; fgf and wnt are posterior-high, whereas retinoic acid has the opposite pattern. b, diffusion map of the cells from the mesoderm progenitors, psm and somitic mesoderm clusters (n=2,999), ordered based on the expression of genes that correlated with fgf8 expression; the first two diffusion components are shown. the colour gradient indicates the trajectory from mesoderm progenitors to somites as a pseudo-space measurement, as in c. dpt, diffusion pseudo-time. c, heatmap of the genes involved in establishing signalling gradients. aldh1a2 encodes the enzyme that synthesizes retinoic acid, whereas cyp26a1 encodes the enzyme that degrades retinoic acid. cells have been ordered in pseudo-space on the x axis. each gene is regularized so that the expression values are within [0,1]. mp, mesoderm progenitors. d, expression changes along the pseudo-space trajectory can be clustered into six groups, one of which (last) shows a wave-like pattern that is consistent with oscillatory expression. the mean regularized probability of expression for all genes in each cluster is plotted as a solid line and the shading around it shows ±1 s.d. e, heatmap of the expression of all genes in the last cluster from d. cells have been ordered in pseudo-space on the x axis. each gene is regularized so that the expression values are within [0,1]. f, representative heatmap of the same genes as in e on the dissected psm of an embryo that was split into five segments from posterior to anterior, as schematized at the far right in a. six biological replicates were analysed, all with similar results; the other five replicates are presented in supplementary fig 3b. g, regularized logistic fit of the expression across the pseudo-space for genes with well-characterized oscillatory expression16. most show a wave-like pattern. h, expression pattern of cited1 in dissected segments of psm from the most posterior to the most anterior, for six different biological replicates. the gene shows a wave-like pattern, and different embryos peak at different regions of the psm.']. Reference sentences:[motivated by this we focused on the process of somitogenesis which involves the segmentation of the developing embryonic body axis into somites and is guided by oscillating genes which create waves of expression that travel across the presomitic mesoderm (psm) from posterior to anterior16 (fig 3a).the poste- rior end of the psm is marked by high levels of wnt and fibroblast growth factor (fgf) signalling whereas somites show high levels of retinoic acid16 (fig 3a).we first ordered cells along a putative anteroposterior (ap) axis by using genes that were highly correlated with fgf8 expres- sion which serves as a positional landmark16 (fig 3b).the inferred pseudo-space axis recapitulated the expected signalling gradients from the highest expression of fgf8 to the highest expression of aldh1a2 which encodes the synthesizing enzyme of retinoic acid (fig 3c).the expression profiles of 1000 genes were inconsistent with constant expression across pseudo-space (fig 3d; see methods); 93 of these genes showed wave-like expression that peaked along the pseudo-space trajectory (fig 3e) and included several well- known regulators of somitogenesis such as hes5 lfng and dll1 (ref.indeed when examining the expression across pseudo-space of experimentally characterized oscillating genes most showed wave-like expression (fig 3g).moreover we identified several genes where oscillatory activity has not been reported (fig 3e) but that behave similarly to classic oscillating genes.one of these cited1 (fig 3e) has been identified as being expressed within the psm17 and is known to block epithelial differentiation in the kidney18.to validate these findings we dissected the psm of four differ- ent mouse embryos—keeping the left and right sides separate— and divided each into five segments from posterior to anterior (supplementary fig 3a and supplementary video 1).the expression dynamics across the ap axis of the 93 genes we defined as oscillatory (fig 3e) were well correlated to the single- cell data (median pearson’s correlation interquartile range for all genes = 0.51–0.78; fig 3f and supplementary fig 3b) and so were the profiles of well-characterized oscillatory genes (supplementary fig 3c).furthermore the expression profile of cited1 showed a wave-like pattern in five out of the six replicates peaking at distinct locations along the ap axis consistent with embryo-specific wave progression (fig 3h).letters nature cell biology a newly forming somites travelling waves of gene expression psm formed somites notochord lateral view dorsal view fgf wnt retinoic acid signalling gradients head heart tail bud posterior anterior 0 0.08 0.16 0.12 0.04 dc1 dc2 dpt b c mps somites aldh1a2 cyp26a1 fgf8 low d low e cited1 lmo2 frzb dll3 dll1 tbx6 gbx2 snai1 osr1 nrarp epha4 lfng notch1 dlk1 dkk1 lmo1 fgf9 lhx1 nkd2 f hes1 hes5 hes7 lfng nrarp dkk1 dll1 dact1 snai1 regularized probability of expression g regularized expression h high high fig 3 | oscillating patterns of gene expression during somitogenesis can be inferred from scrna-seq data.six biological replicates were analysed all with similar results; the other five replicates are presented in supplementary fig 3b.to model the expression pattern across the ap axis (segments 1 to 5) we fitted a degree 2 model using local linear regression (locfit function with nn set to 1); we then used this model to predict the expression levels across 17 regularly spaced intervals from most posterior to most anterior to generate smoother profiles (fig 3h and supplementary fig 3c).]
Summary: Gene expression patterns during somitogenesis show wave-like oscillations along a pseudo-space trajectory, consistent with known regulators and novel genes.

Text 45
10.1038/s41593-017-0056-2
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 5 | perinatal, juvenile, and adult processes in dentate neurogenesis. a, t-sne visualisation of 24,185 cells colored by cluster (24 clusters, names indicated), sampled from perinatal (e16.5–p5), juvenile (p18–p23), and adult (p120–p132) mice. pyr, pyramidal cells; mol, mature oligodendrocytes. b, t-sne colored by sampling age (perinatal, orange; juvenile and adult, red). c, developmental trajectories for perinatal (orange) and juvenile and adult (red) maturation processes, as suggested in b, indicated by arrows. d, singe-cell marker-gene expression of astrocytes and clusters involved in granule cell neurogenesis. black bars on top indicate sampling age. e, pairwise comparison of gene expression (average number of molecules per cluster) of juvenile and adult rgl (n=199) versus astrocytes (n=2,053) clusters by two-sided wilcoxon rank-sum test. red dots are genes enriched at false discovery rate (fdr)adjusted q<0.001, with the 20 most significant genes on either side labeled (red dots with outlines). we found 43 genes that were differentially expressed at least twofold. solid line indicates equal expression; dashed lines mark twofold enrichment. dashed box indicates inset enlarged for readability below.']. Reference sentences:[noting the rapid maturation of neuroblasts into mature granule pyramidal maturation granule maturation oligodendrocyte maturation astrocyte maturation perinatal juvenile–adult 0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5 4.0 4.5 thrsp notch2 btg1 itih3 pbx1 glul aqp4 clu gja1 sparcl1 bcan slc4a4 atp1a2 id3 sepp1 aldoc scg3 cspg5 acsl6 atp1b2 abhd3 0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 astrocyte (juvenile) radial glia-like rgl vs. astrocytes riiad1 ascl1 frzb btg2 sox4 e330013p04rik hopxos tfap2cemx1 2700094k13rik perinatal juvenile–adult a e c b d htra4 gpr37l1 pla2g7 ncan1 hopx xist gm10561 rpl23a-ps3 jun gc (adult) cas pyr gaba immature pyr immature gaba immature astrocyte microglia pvm astrocyte (adult) ependymal rg-like rg rg-cycling nipc mol nfol opc neuroblast cajal–retzius vlmc endothelial immature gc gc (juvenile) e16.5 p0 p5 p18 p19 p23 p120 p132 aqp4 44 44 23 11 66875411 10 40 24 7711 7311 812 34624 315 13 33 39 16 711 39 gja1 htra1 acsl6 riiad1 rhcg wnt8b frzb ascl1 tfap2c emx1 padi2 notch2 thrsp gm10561 fam210b cdk1 top2a mxd3 eomes elavl2 elavl4 sox4 insm1 tbr1 gal neurog2 neurod4 tac2 igfbpl1 sox11 vim cdk4 acot1 id3 immature astrocyte age astrocyte (juvenile) astrocyte (juvenile) astrocyte (adult) rg rg-like rg-cycling nipc nb fig 5 | perinatal juvenile and adult processes in dentate neurogenesis.we performed clustering and identified cell types independently in this separate dataset which confirmed the findings previously obtained by drop- let microfluidics (supplementary fig 5).we observed that gfp+ cells did not necessarily express endogenous gfap and included not only astrocytes and rgls but also perivascular macrophages (pvms) oligodendrocyte precursor cells oligodendrocytes and neuroblasts (supplementary fig 5).to address these questions we generated a third larger data- set (dataset c; 10x chromium) spanning perinatal (e16.5–p5) juvenile (p18–p23) and adult (p120–p132) animals (fig 5a–d and supplementary fig 1 and 7).rgls were also confirmed to be clearly distinct from juvenile (and adult) astro- cytes (fig 5e) particularly expressing transcription-factor-encod- ing genes sox4 and ascl1 as well as thrsp (also known as spot14) a regulator of adult neurogenesis via lipid metabolism3536 that is expressed in the quiescent radial and nonradial cells that give rise to the neuronal lineage in adult mice.these clusters also largely expressed the same enriched markers as previously observed (fig 5d).however because the dissection at the earlier timepoints necessarily included some hippocampus proper we now also observed immature pyra- midal neurons (fig 5a).furthermore the extension to perinatal time points (e16.5 p0 and p5) revealed the existence of a perinatal-specific early neuro- genesis program (fig 5bc).perinatal radial glia (rg) were distinct from juvenile and adult rgls with greater expression of sox4 and sox11 (which are jointly required to generate the hippocampus37) vim at the younger ages and an increased expression of notch2 and padi2 in the juvenile and adult (fig 5d).we also found perinatal-specific cycling radial glia (rg-cycling; fig 5d) which differed from nipcs in their lower expression of genes encoding neurogenic transcription factors such as eomes elavl2 elavl4 neurog2 neurod4 sox4 and sox11.in contrast nipcs spanned the full range of ages from e16.5 to p132 (fig 5d) as did neuroblasts and immature granule cells.this was true both for cells sampled without selection and for hgfap:gfp+ cells sorted by fluorescence-activated cell sorting (facs supplementary fig 1g; compare also the result from dataset b in supplementary fig 5).at the same time the gradual reduction of nipcs and neuroblasts (fig 5) con- firms that they must be transient cellular states while the abun- dances of rgls and astrocytes remained roughly stable in adult animals.the quiescent radial glia differed with a perfect separation at the second postnatal week: no perinatal rgs were found after p5 and no juvenile or adult rgls were found before p18 (fig 5d).]
Summary: Trajectory patterns of maturation processes from perinatal to juvenile and adult stages in dentate neurogenesis, with distinct gene expressions in different cell clusters.

Text 46
10.1038/s41467-018-03149-4
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 5 using scnmt-seq to explore dynamics of the epigenome during differentiation. a embryoid body cells ordered in a developmental trajectory inferred from the rna-seq data. shown is the location of each cell in pseudotime (x axis) versus the expression level of esrrb (y axis). b reconstructed dynamics of variation in chromatin accessibility profiles across the developmental trajectory. shown are profiles of representative cells for rock2 and efhd1. axis ticks display –200 bp, 0 bp and +200 bp relative to the tss. shading is used to highlight changes between cells. c developmental trajectory is associated changes in genome-wide methylation-accessibility coupling. shown is the location of each cell in pseudotime (x axis) and the corresponding pearson correlation coefficients between methylation and accessibility (y axis) in different genomic contexts']. Reference sentences:[when considering the rna-seq component dimensionality reduction17 and hierarchical cluster- ing revealed that cells cluster by condition and not by protocol (supplementary fig 5).to explore this we used the rna-seq component to reconstruct a pseudotemporal ordering of the cells from pluripotent to differentiated cell states (fig 5a methods).fig 5b depicts two representative genes: efhd1 a gene that dis- plays a transition from a state with an open transcription start site (tss) to a state with a closed tss; and rock2 with a similar transition on the +1 nucleosome after the tss.to this end we plotted methylation- accessibility correlation coefficients (as calculated in fig 2a) against pseudotime which revealed an increasing negative correlation coefficient between dna methylation and accessi- bility in practically all genomic contexts (fig 5c).accessibility profiles were constructed within each cell and gene in +/–200 bp windows around the tss (as displayed in fig 5b and supplementary fig 14 15 and 16) using a generalised linear model (glm) of basis function regression coupled with a bernoulli likelihood using bprmeth22.]
Summary: Trajectory of cells from pluripotent to differentiated states, with changes in gene expression, chromatin accessibility, and methylation-accessibility coupling.

Text 47
10.1016/j.ajhg.2018.02.001
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 2. subclusters of p7 thþ neurons are identified based on marker gene analyses (a) a t-sne plot of all p7 neurons collected colored by subset cluster identity. the neurons mostly cluster by regional identity. (b) t-sne plot of p7 fb neurons. p7 fb neurons cluster into two distinct populations. (c) t-sne plot of p7 ob neurons. p7 ob neurons cluster into three populations. these populations represent a trajectory of thþ ob maturation (table s3) as indicated by the red arrow. (d) a t-sne plot of p7 mb neurons. p7 mb neurons cluster into four clusters: the substantia nigra (sn), the ventral tegmental area (vta), the periaqueductal gray area (pag), and a neuroblast-like population.']. Reference sentences:[analysis of p7 fb revealed two distinct cell clusters (figure 2b).expression of the neuropeptides gal and ghrh and the gsx1 transcription factor place p7.fb.1 cells in the arcuate nucleus (tables 1 s2 and s3).44–46 the iden- tity of p7.fb.2 however was less clear although subsets of cells therein did express other arcuate nucleus markers for thþ/ghrh= neuronal populations e.g. onecut2 arx prlr slc6a3 and sst (figure s3d; table s3).46 all three identified ob clusters (figure 2c) express marker genes of ob da neuronal development or survival (tables s2 and s3; figure s3e).47 it has previously been reported that dcx expression diminishes with neuronal maturation48 and snap25 marks mature neurons.49 we observe that these ob clusters seem to reﬂect this continuum of maturation wherein expression of dcx diminishes and snap25 increases with progression from p7.ob1 to ob3 (figure s3e).this pattern is mirrored by a concomitant in- crease in ob da neuron fate specification genes (figure s3e).4750 in addition we identified four p7 mb da subset clusters (figure 2d).this population of p7 mb da neurons p7.mb.2 (figure 2d) is likely a neuroblast-like population based on marker gene analysis (tables 1 and s3).we graphically represented the eigenvalues for each module in each cell in p7 t-sne space confirming that a majority of these significant modules (6/7) except figure 2.modules (‘‘green’’ and ‘‘brown’’) that were enriched for the ‘‘parkinson’s disease’’ kegg gene set are labeled with ‘‘pd.’’ (d) the eigengene value for each p7 neuron in the seven wgcna modules shown to be significantly positively associated with a subset cluster overlaid on the t-sne plot of all p7 neurons (figure 2a).]
Summary: Trajectory of maturation in different cell populations based on marker gene expression patterns.

Text 48
10.1038/nature25999
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 1 | transcriptional landscape of single cells in the ganglionic eminences. a, schematic of experimental workflow. axes: a, anterior; d, dorsal; l, lateral; m, medial; p, posterior; v, ventral. b, visualization of drop-seq data from ganglionic eminence cells using t-distributed stochastic neighbour embedding. c, canonical marker expression in ganglionic eminence precursors, excitatory neurons and vascular endothelial cells; colours as in b. d, a principal curve was fitted to the dominant diffusion map coordinates to order cells along a maturation trajectory. e, expression (molecules per cell) of canonical regulators, as a function of the position along the maturation trajectory. the curve reflects local averaging of single-cell expression. locally averaged values were multiplied by five for visualization on the same scale as the molecule counts. f, percentage of cycling cells as a function of the position along the maturation trajectory; the dotted blue line marks the inferred mitoticto-postmitotic transition. g, coronal brain sections of the ganglionic eminences, as cells migrate away from the ventricular zone (the apical surface of the ventricular zone is at the top of the images). images were taken 3, 6, 12 and 24h after fluorescent labelling with flashtag technology. scale bar, 50μm. h, maturation score distributions of flashtag labelled cells, separated by time point.']. Reference sentences:[transcriptional profiling of ganglionic eminence cells we manually dissected ganglionic eminence cells from wild-type mouse embryos at embryonic day (e)13.5 (for the mge) or e14.5 (for the cge and lge)—time points corresponding to peak neurogenesis in these structures78 which include both dividing mitotic progenitors as well as postmitotic precursor cells (fig 1a supplementary table 1).we performed latent variable regression to mitigate heterogeneity resulting from cell-cycle state1011 (extended data fig 1)—preventing subsequent analysis from being dominated by mitotic phase-specific gene expression—and filtered out rare con- taminating populations of excitatory neurons (neurod6; 2.6% of cells) and endothelial cells (igfbp7; 0.7% of cells) (fig 1b c).the remaining 96.7% of cells were neuronal progenitors and precursors derived from the ganglionic eminences (for example dlx1; fig 1b c).within this population the expression of early intermediate and late marker genes was strongly associated with the top diffusion map coordinates (dmc; extended data fig 1).to establish a quantitative temporal account of differentiation programs within each eminence we fit a principal curve through the dmc representing an ordered ‘maturation trajectory’ for single cells based on their expression profiles12 (fig 1d).we obtained very similar trajectories using approaches based on principal compo- nent analysis or reverse graph embedding13 (extended data fig 1) and observed that the maturation trajectory recapitulated known dynamics associated with neuronal maturation (fig 1e) while also seg- regating ganglionic eminence cells into mitotic and postmitotic phases (fig 1f extended data fig 1).2 | n a t u r e | v o l 0 0 0 | 0 0 m o n t h 2 0 1 8 article research ganglionic eminences and performed scrna-seq on cohorts of 3- 6- 12- and 24-h-old neurons as they migrated away from the ventricle (supplementary table 1 fig 1g).as expected neurons generated at these sequential time points were distributed progressively along the maturation trajectory timeline (fig 1h extended data fig 1).consistent with our predictions conditional deletion of mef2c in inhibitory neurons led to a specific loss of pvalb-interneurons by p20 in cortical layers 2–6 (fig 4f g extended data fig 10) indicating that mef2c is essential for the generation of this population.see extended data fig 10a.our final ‘cell cycle score’ (extended data fig 1) is the difference between s-phase score and g2/m-phase score.we observed a sharp transition point along the maturation trajectory at which cells uniformly transitioned into a postmitotic state corresponding to the loss of proliferation potential and exit from the cell cycle (fig 1f extended data fig 1).the point where this curve falls below half the global average marks the dividing threshold (fig 1f).we selected all cells that we determined to be mitotic (as defined above fig 1f extended data fig 1) but ignored the 1% of cells with the lowest maturation score to be more robust against outliers.we used these values for the scatter plots in extended data fig 10.article research extended data figure 1 | ordering cells along a maturation trajectory.b using principal component analysis to reconstruct developmental maturation returns nearly identical results to the diffusion map analysis in fig 1.i j to isolate postmitotic cells we calculated a maturation trajectory (i) and used the cell cycle scores to identify the transition point between mitotic and postmitotic cells (j) as with the eminence datasets in fig 1. k to avoid the possibility of facs false-negative mge cells contaminating our lhx6–gfp-negative dataset we clustered the postmitotic cells from this dataset and filtered out three rare clusters where lhx6 mrna expression was detected in more than 20% of cells (supplementary methods).article research extended data figure 10 | a subset of embryonic markers of cardinal type specification in mouse are conserved in adult human neurons.therefore when we identified small populations of excitatory neurons (neurod6; 2.6% of cells) and endothelial cells (igfbp7; 0.7% of cells) (fig 1b c) both were excluded from further analysis.]
Summary: Cells ordered along a maturation trajectory based on gene expression profiles, showing a transition from mitotic to postmitotic states.

Text 49
10.1038/nature25999
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 2 | a common developmental program of gene expression functions in the mitotic progenitors of all three ganglionic eminences. a, volcano plots depicting differential gene expression across eminences for early mitotic cells (maturation score<0.3). transcription factors are annotated. b, gene-expression dynamics in mitotic cells, based on local averaging of single-cell data, plotted along maturation score for 840 developmentally regulated genes that were conserved across eminences. c, ish patterns of early, intermediate and late maturation-trajectory genes in the ganglionic eminences that are highly expressed within anatomical boundaries of the ventricular zone, subventricular zone and mantle zone, respectively. d, the variance explained individually by a set of annotated factors, relative to the variance explained by the first principal component. calculated independently for maturation score (ms), cell cycle score (ccs), eminence of origin (emin), umis per cell and reads per cell.']. Reference sentences:[to identify regionally expressed transcription factors2317 we performed a differential expression analysis and found a small number of genes for transcription factors that were enriched in mitotic progenitors within particular eminences (fig 2a extended data fig 2 supplementary table 2) many of which (for example nr2f1 nr2f2 nkx2-1) have previously been characterized6.the majority of dynamically expressed genes followed robust and highly reproducible sequential waves of gene expression in all three eminences (fig 2b extended data fig 2d supplementary table 3).in situ hybridization (ish) confirmed that these waves describe the sequential expression of stem-cell (for example nes) proneural (for example ascl1) and neuro genic genes (for example dcx) approximately correlating with the spatiotempo- ral progression from the ventricular zone to the mantle zone (fig 2c extended data fig 3).developmental progression and cell cycle were the primary sources of transcriptional variance in these progenitors (supplementary methods) with maturation proportionally explaining sixfold more variance compared to eminence-of-origin (fig 2d).consistent with our earlier findings (fig 2) we did not observe common sources of variation shared between adult interneurons and mitotic progenitors.fluorescent in situ hybridization (ish) for nestin (nes) and cyclin d2 (ccnd2) transcripts (fig 2d) was performed as previously described35.article research normalized expression) we created smoothed expression estimates for visu alization in fig 2b c and generated these by first fitting a loess curve (span = 0.5 degree = 2) to the normalized expression of each gene with maturation score as predictor.we call 840 of these genes highly conserved because all eminence-specific expression fits have a pearson correlation > 0.9 with the fitted values obtained using the combined data (fig 2b).we wanted to identify genes that were differentially expressed in the early mitotic cells between the eminences (fig 2a supplementary table 3) and also between cells assigned to different branches (fig 3e supplementary table 4).for visualization and interpretation in fig 2e and 3k we normalized these values by the variance explained by the first principal component of the dataset.article research extended data figure 2 | enrichment of differentially expressed genes in the mge cge and lge.genes are selected from the differentially expressed genes in early mitotic cells (fig 2a).]
Summary: Conserved gene expression patterns along a developmental trajectory in mitotic progenitors of different regions.

Text 50
10.1038/nature25980
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 6b). using monocle analysis, we found that the developmental trajectory of npcs followed three major paths: early and late paths from ventricular radial glia (vrg) to ipc and a late path to org cells (fig 2b). to identify genes regulating radial glial cells in symmetric, neurogenic or gliogenic divisions19, we analysed the differentially expressed genes in eomes− npcs from gw8 to gw10 and from gw16 to gw19 (extended data fig 6c). we found that hmga2 was expressed in sox2+ and ki-67+ cells in the ventricular zone and svz of gw10 pfc but not in npcs from gw16 pfc (extended data fig 6d). in addition, several differentially expressed genes in eomes− npcs']. Reference sentences:[]
Summary: Identification of developmental trajectories in single cells from ventricular radial glia to different cell types based on gene expression patterns.

Text 51
10.1038/nature25980
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 1 | molecular diversity of cells from the developing human pfc. a, visualization of major classes of cells using t-sne. dots, individual cells; colour, gestational weeks (gw); colour contours, cell types. right, expression of known markers; grey, no expression; yellow–red, relative expression. b, hierarchical clustering analysis of 35 subclasses. microglia: n=5, 38, 10 and 15 cells, left to right; npcs: n=28, 23, 44, 60, 54, 21, 15, 38 and 7 cells, left to right; opcs: n=22, 28, 12 and 55 cells, left to right; excitatory neurons: n=53, 103, 149, 163, 189, 142 and 258 cells, left to right; interneurons: n=261, 120, 37, 64, 24, 63, 80 and 52 cells, left to right; astrocytes: n=47, 12 and 17 cells, left to right. pie charts, distribution over gestational weeks; orange dots, subclass size. c, d, singlecell trajectories by monocle analysis showing development of the pfc.']. Reference sentences:[to analyse the molecular features of cells in the pfc during human brain development we obtained 2309 single cells from human embryonic pfcs at gestational weeks (gw)8 to 26 (specifically gw8 gw9 gw10 gw12 gw13 gw16 gw19 gw23 and gw26; three and two biological replicates at gw10 and gw23 respectively; extended data fig 1a b).to classify the major cell types in the developing pfc we performed t-distributed stochastic neighbour embedding (t-sne) analysis using seurat5 and identified six major clusters: neural progenitor cells (npcs) excitatory neurons interneurons astrocytes oligodendrocyte progenitor cells (opcs) and microglia (fig 1a extended data figs 1c d 2a b).biological replicate samples were evenly distributed on the t-sne plot (extended data fig 1c).to further analyse the subclusters within each cell type we used random forest6 analysis to segregate cells into 35 distinct subtypes (fig 1b extended data fig 2c).by analysing differentially expressed genes among the clusters (fig 1b supplementary table 1) we identified sfrp1 and rbfox1 as markers of npcs and excitatory neurons and verified this by immunofluorescence (extended data fig 2d).the remaining cells were distributed along pseudo- temporally ordered paths from npcs to neurons (neuronal lineage) or to opcs and astrocytes (glial lineage) (fig 1c extended data fig 4a).neurons developed from npcs in early gestational weeks whereas opcs and astrocytes differentiated from npcs in later weeks (fig 1d extended data fig 4b).using pseudo-time analysis we found decreased sox2 expression in the neuronal lineage but sustained high expression in the glial lineage (fig 1e extended data fig 4).we observed that microglia appeared early in the pfc and were present throughout pfc development (fig 1a).microglia were present outside the ventricular zone at gw8 when they had amoeboid or star-like morphology (fig 1f extended data fig 5c).microglia migrated to the svz and intermediate zone at gw12 and gw16 and then penetrated to the ventricular zone and cortical plate at gw19 and gw23 (fig 1f g extended data fig 5d).microglia in the intermediate zone exhibited multi-directionally orientated processes and those in the ventricular zone and svz had a simpler morphology at gw19 (fig 1f).random forest analysis clusters pfc interneurons into eight subgroups (extended data fig 10a).calb2+ and sst+ interneu- rons appeared early in pseudo-time and were followed by calb1+ cck+ and vip+ interneurons (fig 4 a–c extended data fig 10b).we observed a few ttf1+ cells in the anterior dorsal pfc above the classical neural progenitor zone at gw10 (fig 4d extended data fig 10c).furthermore cell cycle analysis revealed that very few ttf1 lhx6 dlx1 or dlx2-expressing cells in the developing pfc were actively progressing through the cell cycle (extended data fig 10d).notably sst mrna could be detected in the pfc as early as gw7 by pcr with reverse transcription and in gw8 by rna sequencing (rna-seq) analysis (fig 4c extended data fig 10e).however using ish we also detected sst mrna in the ventricular zone and subventricular zone at gw10 although sst protein was undetectable at this stage (extended data fig 10f g).the neurotrophin signalling pathway which has roles in neuronal differentiation and prevention of cell death exhibited a similar pattern (extended data fig 10h).additionally gene enrich- ment analysis showed that notch signals were more involved in regu- lating biological activities of npcs than those of neurons (extended data fig 10i).see extended data fig 10.following the second clustering analysis 2309 cells excluding immune cells and cells enriched in haemoglobin genes were mapped by t-sne (fig 1a).letter research extended data figure 1 | single-cell rna-seq information and molecular diversity of single cells.b expression of known markers is shown using the same layout as in fig 1a (grey no expression; yellow–red relative expression).b the markers (eomes hes1 for npcs; neurod1 neurod6 sla for excitatory neurons; gfap s100b for astrocytes; olig2 pdgfra for opcs) were ordered by monocle analysis in pseudo-time as in fig 1c; the shadow indicates the confidence interval around the fitted curve.letter research extended data figure 10 | subclasses of interneurons and signal pathways regulating neurogenesis.]
Summary: Single-cell trajectories show the development of different cell types in the human pfc, from neural progenitor cells to neurons or glial cells.

Text 52
10.1038/nature25980
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 4 | interneuron development and signalling pathways that regulate neuronal maturation. a, b, single-cell trajectories of interneurons in the pfc by monocle analysis. c, expression of gaba receptors and genes known to be expressed in interneuron progenitors and interneuron subtypes are mapped to the single-cell trajectory plot. d, immunofluorescence staining of ttf1 in the pfc (section i) and mge–lge (section ii) at gw10 and gw17. lge, lateral ganglionic eminence. scale bars, 500μm (i, ii), 100μm (top right (gw17), 3), 50μm (1, 2) and 10μm (4, 5). n= 4 independent replicates per gestational week. e, gsea of axon guidance signalling pathway in excitatory neurons and interneurons at gw16 and gw26. n=663 excitatory neurons; n= 485 interneurons. nes, normalized enrichment score; fdr, false discovery rate. f, mean expression of genes involved in the axon guidance signalling pathway in excitatory neurons and interneurons at gw16 and gw26. see extended data fig 10.']. Reference sentences:[the remaining cells were distributed along pseudo- temporally ordered paths from npcs to neurons (neuronal lineage) or to opcs and astrocytes (glial lineage) (fig 1c extended data fig 4a).neurons developed from npcs in early gestational weeks whereas opcs and astrocytes differentiated from npcs in later weeks (fig 1d extended data fig 4b).using pseudo-time analysis we found decreased sox2 expression in the neuronal lineage but sustained high expression in the glial lineage (fig 1e extended data fig 4).groups of cells expressing interneuron progenitor markers such as ttf1 lhx6 and dlx1 were detected at an early timepoint in a pseudo-time alignment by monocle analysis and persisted throughout development (fig 4a–c).calb2+ and sst+ interneu- rons appeared early in pseudo-time and were followed by calb1+ cck+ and vip+ interneurons (fig 4 a–c extended data fig 10b).4 | n a t u r e | v o l 0 0 0 | 0 0 m o n t h 2 0 1 8 letter research no parvalbumin (pv)+ interneurons were detected suggesting that this neuron subtype might develop after gw26 (fig 4c).we observed a few ttf1+ cells in the anterior dorsal pfc above the classical neural progenitor zone at gw10 (fig 4d extended data fig 10c).by contrast ttf1+ cells were enriched in the medial ganglionic eminence (mge) but not in the cortex close to the mge (fig 4d).there were more ttf1+ cells in the dorsal pfc at gw17 which may originate from the ganglionic eminence (fig 4d).notably sst mrna could be detected in the pfc as early as gw7 by pcr with reverse transcription and in gw8 by rna sequencing (rna-seq) analysis (fig 4c extended data fig 10e).axon guidance signals including axon attraction repulsion and outgrowth were more active in excitatory neurons than in interneurons at gw16; this was reversed at gw26 (fig 4e f).lhx6 dlx1 calb2 calb1 sst cck gabbr2 gabrb2 vip pv ttf1 a c axon guidance interneurons excitatory neurons axon repulsion gw16 1 0 axon attraction axon outgrowth gw26 gw16 gw26 gw16 gw26 e f ppp3ca ppp3cb mapk1 mapk3 rac1 bmpr2 ephb6 plxna4 rock2 sema6c sema6d sema4f pak6 ablim1 cluster 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 nes = –1.24 fdr = 0.48 gw16 interneurons gw16 excitatory neurons 0.2 0 –0.3 nes = 1.75 fdr = 0.01 gw26 interneurons gw26 excitatory neurons 0 0.5 ttf1 dapi d gw17 vz svz 5 5 3 4 1 gw10 mge lge pfc cortex i ii 1 i 2 3 ii cortex 2 4 mge b start end start end gw12 gw13 gw16 gw19 gw23 gw26 gw8 gw9 gw10 plxnb2 plxnb1 plxna1 rock1 slit1 0 6 figure 4 | interneuron development and signalling pathways that regulate neuronal maturation.letter research extended data figure 4 | relative expression of known markers of each cell type.b the expression of known markers of interneurons mapped to the monocle analysis (fig 4a) shows the pseudo-time course of interneurons during development (grey no expression; yellow–red relative expression).]
Summary: Single-cell trajectories of interneuron development and signaling pathways, including expression patterns of interneuron progenitor markers and axon guidance signals in excitatory and interneurons at different gestational weeks.

Text 53
10.1038/nbt.4103
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 6 barcodes shared between progenitor and differentiated cell types. (a) left, t-sne plot showing clustering of neural progenitors and oligodendrocyte cell types only. inset highlights these clusters within the initial t-sne plot from figure 2. right, progenitor cells from the largest barcode clone in two animals zf1 (blue) and zf2 (pink) are displayed on the t-sne plots. these clones were characterized by cells of multiple stem/ progenitor cell types. (b) trajectory of cerebellar granule cell differentiation generated with monocle 2. cells are colored by pseudotime. inset highlights these clusters within the initial t-sne plot. (c) cells along the trajectory are colored by cluster: c19 (progenitor); c6 and c26 (differentiated). the distribution of several cells containing one of three different scgestalt barcodes from zf1 and zf2 are shown as examples to highlight barcodes found along the trajectory. (d) heat map of gene expression changes of selected markers during granule cell differentiation. rows are marker genes, columns are single cells arranged in pseudotime, representative transcription factors are colored in blue.']. Reference sentences:[]
Summary: Trajectory analysis reveals differentiation from progenitor to differentiated cells, with gene expression changes highlighted along the pseudotime.

Text 54
10.1126/science.aar2131
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 3. identification of a transitional cell type and a conversion process in the kidney collecting duct. (a) the expression level of marker genes across the 16 clusters. y-axis is log scale normalized read count. (b) gene expression levels in pc (aquaporin 2, aqp2), ic (h+atpase, atp6v1g3,) and in transitional cells (syt7) demonstrated by a tsne plot. (c) representative immunofluorescence images of aqp2 (pc marker), atp6v1b1 (ic marker) and dapi in the kidney collecting duct. arrow demonstrates transitory pc/ic cell type expressing aqp2 and atp6v1b1. (d) heatmap showing the expression level of differentially expressed genes in collecting duct cell types. color scheme is based on z-score distribution. (e) venn diagram showing the overlaps of differentially expressed genes between pc, ic and the novel cell type. (f) immunofluorescence staining for parm1 (ic specific) and aqp2 (upper panel) or atp6v1b1 (lower panel) in the kidney collecting duct. a “double positive” cell is shown at the arrow (g) ordering single cells along a cell conversion trajectory using monocle. three collecting duct cell clusters were used for ordering and plotted on low dimensional space with different colors. the tsne plots next to the trajectory map show differentially expressed genes in the corresponding cell lineages. (h) aqp2cremt/mg mouse model used for lineage tracing of aqp2 positive cells. immunofluorescence staining for gfp, atp6v1b1 and aqp2. right panel is the quantification of gfp positive cells (mean ± sd). n=3. note that aqp2 driven gfp (white) is found in pc (red + white) and ic (green + white) and in transitional cells (not shown) (i) atp6cremt/mg mouse model used for lineage tracing of atp6ase positive cells. immunofluorescence staining for gfp, atp6v1b1 and aqp2 in atp6cremt/mg mice. note that atp6v1b1 driven gfp (white) is found in pc (red+ white) and ic (green+ white) and in transitional cells (red+ green+ white).']. Reference sentences:[this cell cluster (cluster 8: trans) expressed markers of both ic and pc cells (“double positive cells” fig 3 a and b) and additional cell type-specific markers.we performed double immunofluorescence staining and in situ hybridization with probes for aqp2 and atp6v1b1 (fig 3c) and cell type-specific markers such as parm1 and sec23b (fig 3 d e f and fig s14) to validate the existence of this cell type.we found that the novel cells were located between pcs and ics suggesting that cluster 8 is a transitional cell type (fig 3g).furthermore cell trajectory analysis clearly sepa- rated ic into a- and b-ic types and pc cells into their sub- types (principal cells and what are most likely connecting duct cells) as previously identified (fig 3g and fig s17) (7 25).we generated mice that carry a lineage tag in differentiated principal cells (aqp2cremt/mg) or in differentiated intercalated cells (atp6cremt/mg) (fig 3 h and i).among the aqp2cremt/mg gfp-positive cells 61.6% of the cells were aqp2-positive 29.2% were atp6v1b1-positive and 9.2% of the cells were positive for both aqp2 and atp6v1b1 (fig 3h).similar analyses were performed with the atp6cremt/mg lineage which showed that both “double positive” aqp2 and atp6v1b1-positive transitional cells as well as atp6v1b1-negative true pc cells can originate from atp6v1b1-positive ic cells (fig 3i).]
Identification of a transitional cell type and conversion process in kidney collecting duct, demonstrated by trajectory analysis and marker gene expressions.

Text 55
10.1126/science.aaq1723
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 3. lineage tree reconstruction by paga and velocyto. a. abstracted graph showing all the possible edges with a probability higher than 10e-6 connecting two clusters and their confidence. each node corresponds to each of the clusters identified using seurat. the size of nodes is proportional to the amount of cells in the cluster. the most probable path connecting the clusters is plotted on top with thicker edges. b. lineage tree colored according to potency score, which ranges from blue (0) to yellow (1). c, d. lineage trees colored according to the % of x1 (c) or h2b(rnai) resistant (d) cells in each cluster. x1 cells are most abundant in the neoblast 1 cluster whereas h2b(rnai) resistant cells are mostly located in the leaves of the tree. e. velocyto force field showing the average differentiation trajectories (velocity) for cells located in different parts of the tsne plot. f, g. root (f) and terminal end-points (g) obtained after modeling the transition probabilities derived from the rna velocity using a markov process. the color scale represents the density of the end points of the markov process and ranges from yellow (low) to blue (high).']. Reference sentences:[when running this algorithm without any assumptions about the tree structure we obtained an abstracted graph that shows high confidence of the branching events (fig 3a) from which we can derive a single differentiation tree that included all the cell types and linked them to a single root the neoblast 1 cluster.this tree defines independent differentiation branches for all the major tissues such as neurons muscle parenchyma and gut (fig 3a).this analysis showed that neoblast 1 the largest stem cell cluster had a score of 1 (fig 3b) correctly assigning pluripotency to ne- oblasts as expected from earlier literature (21).progenitor clusters showed lower potency than neoblasts and higher potency scores than differentiated cells (fig 3b) in agree- ment with a gradual potency loss.most x1 cells were located in the neoblast 1 cluster (fig 3c) whereas h2b(rnai) resistant cells were more enriched in the leaves of the tree (fig 3d).although some of these neoblast clusters are connected to differentiated cell types (fig 3a) most do not give rise to differentiated cell types raising the possibility that they represent neoblasts in dif- ferent metabolic cell cycle or activation states (supplemen- tary note 5).these clusters are mostly devoid of x1 cells (fig 3c) and therefore corre- spond mainly to post-mitotic progenitors.we estimated mrna velocities for each cell and projected the estimated future states of cells onto the tsne which describe the paths pre- dicted by the mrna velocity model (fig 3e and fig s12a).additionally velocyto can also model longer cell trajectories in order to identify their root (fig 3f) and terminal end points (fig 3g) which corresponded to the tsne regions containing stem cells and terminally differentiated cells respectively.as a result all disconnected clusters contain differentiation trajectories with independent start and end points (fig 3f g).]
Summary: Differentiation trajectories of cells, potency scores, and distribution of specific cell types along a lineage tree in single-cell data analysis.

Text 56
10.1126/science.aaq1736
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 6. tissue subclustering reveals a previously unidentified class of cells. (a) t-sne representation of the cathepsin+ cell subcluster. fish images are labeled by their associated cluster(s). images associated with subclusters 5/10 and 8 are single slices in the animal. all other images are maximum intensity projections. (b) double fish for 2 cathepsin+ cell markers enriched in the same subclusters, 4 and 16. (c to e) fish for dd_9 and (c) mat, (d) chat, and (e) dd_7742. (f) top: cell trajectory of dd_1831+ and dd_9+ cathepsin+ cell lineages produced by monocle. cells colored by identity. bottom: heat map of branch dependent genes (q-value < 1e-175) across cells plotted in pseudotime. cells, columns; genes, rows. beginning of pseudotime at center of heatmap. “cl.” annotation indicates a log-fold enrichment ≥ 1 of the gene in that cathepsin+ cell seurat cluster. scale bars: whole-animal images, 200 μm; insets and (b) to (e), 50 μm.']. Reference sentences:[sub- clustering of cathepsin+ cells identified 4 subclusters ex- pressing smedwi-1 that represented putative precursor cells (clusters 0 1 3 and 6) (fig 2m) a glial subcluster (cluster 15) and two pigment cell populations (clusters 11 and 14) identifying transcriptomes for these cell types (fig 6a and fig s29 a and b and s30b).fish revealed striking elaborate morphologies for most of these cells involving long processes and unique distributions (fig 6a and fig s29b and s30b).fish identified markers labeling cell bodies of these cells revealing that the aggregates were comprised of many cells (fig 6b).the most elaborate of these newly identified cells (subclusters 5 and 10) were excluded from the intestine and brain but had processes around the branches of the intestine and protonephridia and inter- spersed within the cephalic ganglia (fig 6 c to e and fig s31 a and b).the monocle toolkit was also used to build single cell trajecto- ries for these clusters with data closely recapitulating the transition states identified by seurat (fig 6f fig s33 and table s3).]
Patterns of cell lineage trajectories and branch-dependent gene expression across cells in pseudotime.

Text 57
10.1126/science.aaq1736
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 3. subclustering of tissues reveals transcriptomes for known and novel cell populations. (a) t-sne representation of the protonephridial subcluster. fish images are labeled by their associated cluster. (b) t-sne representation of intestinal subclusters. (c) double fish images of genes enriched in separate intestinal subclusters. numbers indicate the associated subcluster for each marker. (d) top: cell trajectory of enterocyte and outer intestinal cell lineages produced by monocle. cells colored by identity. bottom: heat map of branch dependent genes (q-value < 1e-145) across cells plotted in pseudotime. cells, columns; genes, rows. beginning of pseudotime at center of heatmap. “cl.” annotation indicates a log-fold enrichment ≥ 1 of the gene in that intestine seurat cluster. (e) top left: intestine t-sne plot colored by expression of ptf1a (dd6869). top right: illustration of cutting scheme used to generate fragments. bottom: dd_115 and dd_75 fish of control and ptf1a (dd6869) rnai animals. animals cut and fixed 23 days following the start of dsrna feedings. scale bars: whole-animal/fragment images, 200 μm; insets, 50 μm.']. Reference sentences:[subclustering of 890 protonephridia cells (fig 1c) identified each known protonephridia cell type as a separate subcluster revealing the complete transcriptomes of these cells (fig 3a and fig s12 a to c).subclustering of 3025 intestinal cells (fig 1c) revealed 3 distinct cell populations (clusters 4 5 and 8) (fig 3b and fig s13 a and b).cluster 4 represented an inner intes- tine cell layer (fig 3c) and was enriched for absorptive en- terocyte markers (39).a third group (cluster 5) represent- ed an outer intestine cell layer and displayed a different set of enriched genes from clusters 4/8 (fig 3c and table s2).the monocle toolkit can be used to predict cellular transitions in lineages (41) and was used to build single cell trajectories for the enterocyte and outer gut cell lineages closely recapitulating the candidate transition states identified by seurat (fig 3d fig s15 and table s3).accordingly inhibition of the transcription factor-encoding ptf1a (dd_6869) gene which had enriched expression in candidate transition states for the outer intestine cluster strongly reduced this cell population while not affecting absorptive enterocytes of the intestine (fig 3e).]
Summary: Identification of cell populations and trajectories in protonephridia and intestine, revealing distinct cell types and lineage transitions.

Text 58
10.1016/j.cell.2018.03.074
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 2. lineage projection of human hematopoietic progenitors (a) top: hierarchical clustering of single-cell epigenomic profiles (columns) and tf motif accessibility z scores (rows). bottom: single-cell profiles colored by their sorted immunophenotype identity. (b) t-sne of tf z scores shown in (a), cells are colored by their sorted immunophenotype identify. (c and d) single-cell epigenomic landscape defined by pca projection (see star methods) colored by (c) cell type identity using immunophenotype and (d) density (see star methods) overlaid with nominal trajectories expected from the literature, as shown in figure 1a. (e–h) pc projection colored by (e) gata, (f) cebpb, (g) id3, and (h) hoxa9 tf motif accessibility z scores. see also figure s2, table s2, and data s1 and s2.']. Reference sentences:[hierarchical clustering of single-cell profiles using tf z scores generally classifies single-cells by their immunophenotypically defined cell type identity (figure 2a).2 -50 -40 -30 -20 -10 0 10 20 30 40 lymphoid myeloid erythroid figure 2.the continuous landscape of human hematopoiesis using this computational approach we find the cal of human hematopoiesis radiates away from a common basin of early he- matopoietic progenitors (figure 2c).differen- tiation into clp (lymphoid) mep (erythroid) and monocytes (myeloid) appear as distinct differentiation trajectories that swoop away from the central hsc basin (figure 2d).analytical frameworks for clustering scatac-seq profiles related to figure 2 (a–d) t-sne embedding of cells colored by the tf z-score activity of (a) gata1 and (b) cebpd motifs or the quality metrics (c) log10 fragment counts and (d) fraction of reads in peaks.]
Summary: Trajectory patterns of hematopoietic cell differentiation based on epigenomic profiles and transcription factor motif accessibility scores.

Text 59
10.1016/j.cell.2018.03.074
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 4. identifying continuous differentiation trajectories (a–d) pc2 by pc3 projection of single-cells highlighting cells progressing through the inferred (a) erythroid, (b) lymphoid, (c) pdc, and (d) myeloid developmental trajectory (black line), cells used for inference are colored by sorted identity, all other cells are shown in gray. (e) sorting schema for different gmp progenitors defined by cd123 expression, marked by cd123 low (gmp-a, light-gray), cd123 medium (gmp-b, gray), and cd123 high (gmp-c, dark-gray). (f) bulk rna-seq log2-fold-change and -(log p value) for expressed genes comparing gmp-c and gmp-a. (g) single-cells used for the myeloid trajectory colored by (left) their cluster identity (cluster colors as in figure 3) or (right) their density along the trajectory. (h) density of myeloid progression scores for immunophenotypically defined cell types, including the gmp subsets. see also figure s4.']. Reference sentences:[a b g c d h e f figure 4.we therefore performed scatac-seq bulk atac-seq (buenrostro et al. 2013 2015a) and bulk rna-seq on cells from three distinct bins of cd123 expression (figure 4e).the list of differentially expressed genes included important developmental regulators including downregulation of hspc tfs gata2 and tal1 and upregulation of myeloid genes spib irf8 tlr7 and mpeg1 in the gmp-c cell population (figure 4f).heterogeneity and development ordering of gmps related to figure 4 (a–d) histogram denoting number of cells within each point in the (a) myeloid (b) erythroid (c) lymphoid and (d) pdc by pseudo-temporal developmental ordering.]
Summary: Identification of continuous differentiation trajectories in single cells progressing through erythroid, lymphoid, pdc, and myeloid developmental paths, with gene expression changes in GMP subsets.

Text 60
10.1016/j.cell.2018.03.074
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 6. regulatory element dynamics links distal elements to genes (a) fragments per cell for a cebpd distal element ordered by myeloid pseudo-time, (top) cells are colored by their sorted identity and (bottom) values are smoothed (blue). error bars (gray) denotes 95% confidence intervals. (b) cis-regulatory and expression dynamics across four regulatory elements near the myeloid regulator cebpd. (c) accessibility (top) and expression (bottom) dynamics across myeloid pseudo-time, rows are sorted by their peak intensity in the myeloid trajectory. (d) regulatory profiles surrounding the cebpd gene, dynamic enhancers are highlighted in gray with significant (blue) and non-significant (gray) correlated peakgene pairs shown as loops. (e and f) mean pearson correlation coefficients binned by (e) genomic distance to the gene and (f) loop confidence. error bars represent 1 sd on the estimate of the mean. (g) p value of enriched peak-gene correlation or promoter capture hic at cis-eqtls overlapping dynamic enhancers. see also figure s6.']. Reference sentences:[for example within the regula- tory elements surrounding the myeloid regulator cebpd (numbered for simplicity see figure 6b) the distal element cebpd-1 was ‘‘fast-to-activate’’ and showed stepwise gains of activity while the distal element cebpd-2 was ‘‘slow-to-acti- vate’’ and showed a more discrete pulse of activity (figure 6b).we reasoned that correlation between dynamically activated patterns of distal regulatory elements with nearby expressed genes may be used to connect enhancers to target genes (figure 6c).indeed we found dynamic regulatory elements sur- rounding cebpd were highly correlated with cebpd expression (figure 6d).more generally we calculated the correlation of reg- ulatory elements to dynamic genes within 10 mb of annotated transcription start sites (‘‘peak-gene pairs’’) and found that proximal regulatory elements (<100 kb) were significantly more correlated to the expression of nearby genes than distant ele- ments (>100 kb) (figure 6e).further validating this approach we also found that the correlation of regulatory elements to target genes improved as a function of loop confidence within promoter capture hic (pchic) data (figure 6f) here defined by pchic loops from both cd34+ (mifsud et al. 2015) and mono- cyte (javierre et al. 2016) cells.loops all peak-gene pairs mean pearson 0 0.1 0.2 0.3 d cebpd expression <1kb 1-10kb 10-100kb 100kb-1mb 1-10mb mean pearson 0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 c g myeloid pseudo-time -2 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 0 max e 14005 variable regulatory elements 1983 variable genes correlate dynamics res to nearby genes (+/-10mb) scatac/rna correlation capture hic interaction enrichment at cis-eqtls (-log10 p-val) 0 1 2 3 4 f scale chr8: 1 mb hg19 48500000 49000000 49500000 50000000 kiaa0146 cebpd prkdc mcm4 ube2v2 efcab1 snai2 c8orf22 bc042029 k1-hsc k2-cmp k9-gmp k10-gmp k11-mono cd34+_hspcs chromosome 8 0 max expression per cell (l0g2) 0 1 2 hsc cmp gmp mono scatac-seq scrna-seq transition peaks early to repress late to repress early to activate late to activate hsc mono peak activity transition expression early to repress late to repress early to activate late to activate <0.5 0.5 1 pearson figure 6.association of tfs and genetic variants to regulatory element dynamics across myeloid differentiation related to figure 6 (a and b) example cis-regulatory dynamics across myeloid development for (a) hsc active peaks and (b) a reactivated peak near il7.]
Patterns of regulatory element dynamics and gene expression correlations along a myeloid trajectory.

Text 61
10.1126/science.aar3131
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 2. developmental trajectories, genes, and connected gene modules overlaid on the force-directed layout. from top to bottom: (1) the trajectories identified by urd from the root to a given population (or group of populations), (2) gene expression of a classical marker of that population, and (3) expression of a 6-somite gene module active in the population and its connected modules from earlier stages. (the remainder are presented in fig. s3).']. Reference sentences:[displaying the expression of classic marker genes on the developmental tree highlighted expected trajectories and confirmed their an- notation (fig 2 gene expression and fig s3).notably cells that ex- press connected gene modules occupied specific urd- recovered developmental trajectories further supporting the structure of the developmental tree reconstructed by urd (fig 2 module expression and fig s3).]
Summary: The figure displays developmental trajectories and gene modules expression on a developmental tree, confirming expected trajectories and connected gene modules across different cell populations.

Text 62
10.1126/science.aar3131
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig. 3. association developmental trajectories with temporal gene expression patterns. (a) the underlying branching structure found by urd. pink bars demarcate collections of cell types used in fig 4a. (b) the structure of connected gene modules. each circular node represents a module and is colored by the developmental stage the module was computed from (as in fig 1a). blue bars demarcate collection of modules downstream of each 50% epiboly (5.3 hpf) gene module used in fig 4b. (c) gene expression cascades during specification of the prechordal plate and notochord. expression is displayed as a moving-window average in pseudotime (along the xaxis), scaled to the maximum observed expression. selected genes are labeled along the y-axis. genes are annotated with whether they were identified as a differentially expressed gene, as a top ranking member of a differentially expressed connected gene module, or both. cascades for all trajectories (with all genes labeled) are presented in fig s5.']. Reference sentences:[]
Summary: Temporal gene expression patterns along developmental trajectories in single cells, with gene modules and cascades showing specification of cell types.

Text 63
10.1126/science.aar3131
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 6. hybrid state of cells in the axial mesoderm. (a) branchpoint plot, showing pseudotime (y-axis) and random walk visitation preference from the notochord (n, left) and prechordal plate (p, right) tips (x-axis), defined as the difference in visitation from the two tips divided by the sum of visitation from the two tips. direct trajectories to notochord (green) and prechordal plate (pink) are highlighted, and intermediate cells are circled. (b) gene expression of notochord markers (top row) and prechordal plate markers (bottom row) at the axial mesoderm branchpoint. intermediate cells express early (ta/ntl, noto) and late (ntd5, shha) notochord markers, but only early prechordal plate markers (gsc, frzb). (c) cells at the branchpoint, colored by developmental stage. intermediate cells have the same developmental stage as fully bifurcated cells with similar pseudotimes. (d) cartoon of the prechordal plate (p) and notochord (n) in the 75% epiboly embryo. (e and f) double fluorescent in situ expression of the early prechordal plate marker gsc (red) and either the early notochord marker ta/ntl [(e), green] or the late notochord marker ntd5 [(f), green] at 75% epiboly (8 hpf). most cells contain only prechordal plate marker mrna (e.g. 1) or notochord marker mrna (e.g. 5). cells with both prechordal plate and notochord marker mrna are observed at the boundary of the two tissues, with red nuclear transcription dots, indicating active transcription of gsc (e.g. 2 to 4) (fig s11). cells that contained both ntd5 and gsc mrna were identified and scored for their nuclear transcription foci, which indicate active transcription (supplementary materials, materials and methods); 56% had 1 or more observable nuclear transcription dots, of which 80% showed only active gsc transcription, 7% showed both active gsc and active ntd5 transcription, and 13% showed active ntd5 transcription alone.']. Reference sentences:[for instance at the axial mesoderm branchpoint most cells fell along the classic bifurcation from progenitor into notochord or prechordal plate fates (15 29) with waves of gene expression corresponding to their specification and differentiation status (fig 6a highlighted).however ~5.4% were intermediate cells that expressed both notochord and prechordal plate markers (fig 6 a and b).the intermediate cells and the completely bifurcated axial mesoderm cells with similar pseudotimes came from embryos at the same devel- opmental stage (fig 6c); moreover they no longer expressed genes characteristic of the progenitors (e.g.indeed some 75% epiboly cells located in the border region between the two tissues co-expressed an early prechordal plate marker (gsc) with either an early (ta/ntl) or late (ntd5) notochord marker (fig 6 d to f and fig s11).]
Intermediate cells express both notochord and prechordal plate markers, transitioning from progenitor states to differentiated fates in axial mesoderm.

Text 64
10.1016/j.cmet.2018.04.013
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 6. etf expression drives loss of cell identity in min6 cells (a) etf expression experiment design. (b) t-sne representation of control, gfp, and etf overexpressing cells from scrna-seq experiment (upper left panel). four clusters identified by raceid2 are depicted with a red color gradient (upper right panel). tsne map superimposed by a color scheme, representing mean etf expression (lower left panel) and mbtf expression (lower right panel). (c) pseudo-temporal ordering of cells along the dedifferentiation trajectory (x axis) and their respective expression levels of ectopic transcription factors (top), mbtfs (second from top), ins1 (middle); ma-dm, mature gene set from melton group; im-dm, immature gene set from melton group (second from bottom) (blum et al., 2012), and the top 2% h3k27ac-broad genes (excludes expression outliers ins1 and ins2) (bottom). (d) mean expression (counts) of etfs in human islet mrna sequencing versus hba1c index. linear regression (solid line) and 95% confidence interval (dash lines) are shown. (e) tsne representation of cells from scrna-seq experiments on 14-week-old beedko (circles) and wt (triangles) islet cells, superimposed by a color scheme, representing mean expression of the depicted gene(sets).']. Reference sentences:[we co-transfected these six dia- betes-specific polycomb-regulated ectopic transcription fac- tors (etfs) (barx1 hoxb7 gata2 pitx1 twist1 and zic1) into the b cell line min6-b1 and tracked gene expression responses by scrna-seq using vectorless and gfp-transfected cells as controls (schematic figure 6a).we compared 359 single-cell transcriptomes including 50 control 78 gfp and 231 etf over- expressing cells (figure 6b).first low etf expression (as little as 2-fold normal) was coupled to decreasing insulin expression (figure 6c region between hashed lines).importantly the levels of ectopic etf expression found able to initiate insulin loss within this 3-day in vitro experiment were comparable with those observed in bulk rna-seq of human dia- betic islets which merges expression profiles of functional and dysfunctional b cells and thus under-represents dysregulation signatures (figure 6d).in a second phase more substantial etf expression tracked with a progressive loss of lineage- defining mbtfs (figure 6c right of second dashed line).also ectopic transcription factor overexpression triggered downregu- lation of our epigenomically unique (h3k27ac-broad) class genes including mbtfs (figure 6c bottom panel).the experiment highlighted the complete plasticity po- tential locked within most differentiated cells and highlighted a e b c d figure 6.]
The trajectory of cell dedifferentiation driven by ectopic transcription factors, marked by decreasing insulin expression and loss of lineage-defining genes.

Text 65
10.1084/jem.20171384
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 7.ly6d, gfra2, and bst1 expression defines a developmental trajectory in b cell development. a schematic drawing depicting how gfra2 and bst1 expression can be used to capture different stages of the b cell commitment process. the expression levels of b220, ebf1, and pax5 are indicated.']. Reference sentences:[]
Summary: Expression of ly6d, gfra2, and bst1 defines a developmental trajectory in b cell development, capturing different stages of commitment.

Text 66
10.1016/j.stem.2018.05.025
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 3. reconstruction of chemical reprogramming trajectory in a pseudotime manner (a) trajectory reconstruction of all single cells throughout chemical reprogramming reveals three branches: pre-branch (before bifurcation), successful branch, and failed branch (after bifurcation). blue and red circles indicate cells at the terminus of the successful and failed branches, respectively. (b) violin plot displaying the expression of representative xen and pluripotency genes in indicated cell types. (c) the expression dynamics of 1,518 top degs were cataloged into 5 major clusters in a pseudotime manner shown as blue lines (successful reprogramming) and red lines (failed reprogramming). thick lines indicate the average gene expression patterns in each cluster.']. Reference sentences:[however shortly after xen-like cell formation cells bifurcated into two diverse branches representing two major cell lineages in the late reprogramming stage (figure 3a).as per the requirements of xen-like program silencing and plu- ripotency program establishment at the end of successful re- programming (figure 3b) sox2 or nanog overexpression in stage iii significantly enhanced cipsc formation in contrast to the blockade of reprogramming by gata4 or gata6 overex- pression (figure s5e) further confirming our bioinformatics anal- ysis.monocle con- structed the final tree structure by using max_components parameter equal 5 for figure 3a.gene expression heatmap in figure 4a is based on lineage trajectory in figure 3a and performed by ‘‘plot_genes_branched_heatmap’’ function of monocle 2.]
Summary: Trajectory patterns of successful and failed reprogramming branches, gene expression dynamics in pseudotime, and lineage bifurcation in late reprogramming stage.

Text 67
10.1016/j.stem.2018.05.025
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 4. 2c-like program activation, pluripotency program upregulation, and xen-like program downregulation represent late molecular series in successful reprogramming (a) gene expression heatmap of 1,518 top degs (cataloged in five clusters) in a pseudo-temporal order. successful and failed reprogramming trajectories (including pre-branch) are shown on the right and left, respectively. class a and b indicate cell populations at earlier stage and later stage after bifurcation, respectively. representative genes are shown on the right. (b) volcano plot displaying the degs in class a cells between the successful and failed branch. representative 2c (green), early pluripotency (orange), and xen (blue) genes are indicated. 2c-like program genes are highlighted as green dots. gray dots represent non-degs (<2-fold change). (c) go analysis of upregulated genes in class a cells comparing the successful with failed branches. (d) go analysis of downregulated genes in class a cells comparing successful with failed branches. 2c, early pluripotency and xen genes are included in green, orange, and blue go terms, respectively. (e) t-sne plot displaying sox17, oct4, and nanog regulons (red dots, active; gray dots, inactive) as well as their intensity distributions in stage iii. (f) ma plot displaying degs comparing the n2b27-sii with fbs/ksr-sii conditions at the end of stage ii. pink dots represent genes that are differentially expressed by >2-fold. (g) venn diagram showing the overlap of upregulated (>4-fold) gene numbers and corresponding percentages of gene number in 2c-like program (in at least 3 overlapping groups) in 4 groups with differential reprogramming potential. all (15 genes) of the commonly upregulated genes in the 4 groups are included in the 2c-like program, some of which are highlighted.']. Reference sentences:[to investigate the sequential changes of all degs we analyzed their expression patterns by dividing cells after bifurca- tion into two classes: earlier stage (class a) and later stage (class b) (figure 4a).consistent with the gene expression analysis (figure 2e) nanog and sox17 regulons were predominantly presented in cipscs and failed reprog- rammed cells respectively distinguishing the pronounced het- erogeneity in stage iii (figure 4e).in addition we projected cells in stage iii on t-sne plot based on different regulon activities (figure s4e) and obtained results similar to those based on gene expression profiling (figure 4e) further supporting our findings.moreover we compared the commonly upregu- lated (>4-fold) genes in four groups of cells and surprisingly found that all of them (n = 15) belonged to the 2c-like program with no exception (figure 4g; table s1) further suggesting a strong positive correlation between reprogramming potential and 2c gene expression.finally we constructed the gene network based on pairwise correlation of the top deg expressions in progressive cell fate transitions from xen-like state to pluripotency (figure 4h).at the end of stage ii 3% of cells were identified to be triple positive for these three genes 68% of which were ci2c-like cells (figure 4i) suggesting the predominant enrichment of the co-expressions in ci2c-like cells.importantly all of the intermediate subnetwork genes including 2c genes (express at the 2c stage) and early pluripotency genes (express from the 2c stage to blasto- cysts) exhibited expression patterns at late chemical reprogram- ming stages that were similar to early embryogenesis from the 2c stage to blastocyst (figure 4j) implying the critical role of remarkable early embryonic transcriptional signature in acquiring chemically induced pluripotency.taken together all the results of genetic loss and gain- of-function studies revealed the chronological occurrence of major transcriptional events from xen-like state to pluripotency (figure 4h).gene expression heatmap in figure 4a is based on lineage trajectory in figure 3a and performed by ‘‘plot_genes_branched_heatmap’’ function of monocle 2.data of volcano plots in figures 4b and s4b is extracted from heatmap matrix in figure 4a.the active regulons were then mapped to siii t-sne for figure 4e.the gene correlation network for figure 4h was constructed by wgcna analysis of the gene expression correlation.]
Summary: Trajectory patterns in successful reprogramming involve activation of 2c-like program, upregulation of pluripotency program, and downregulation of xen-like program.

Text 68
10.1038/s41591-018-0045-3
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 7d). cd8-c4-gzmk cells expressed low-level itgae but high-level pdcd1, whereas cd8-c5-znf683 t cells exhibited the opposite pattern. cd8-c6-layn cells showed high levels of both itgae and t cell exhaustion markers including pdcd1, ctla4, havcr2, lag3 and tigit18 (fig 1c). flow cytometry analysis based on itgae, pd1 and ctla4 antibodies validated the distinction of the three t cell subgroups at the protein level in additional nsclc tumors (supplementary fig 7e). such distinct functional states showed that trm cells should not be viewed as a homogeneous population, especially inside tumors. cd8-c4-gzmk and cd8-c5-znf683, being located more centrally in the monocle trajectory, had lower exhaustion scores than cd8-c6-layn, suggestive of a possible “pre-exhaustion” state. these groups of cells could also be detected in hcc tumors through combined analysis of t cells from both nsclc and hcc20, but cd8-c5-znf683 cells were significantly more abundant in nsclc']. Reference sentences:[]
Summary: Trajectory analysis reveals distinct functional states of T cells in tumors, with some cells showing pre-exhaustion characteristics.

Text 69
10.1016/j.cell.2018.05.060
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 4. detailed characterization of t cells (a) visualization of all t cells using first 3 diffusion components (2 uninformative components denoting isolated clusters were removed). each dot represents a cell colored by cluster, and by tissue type in insert. the main trajectories are indicated with arrows and annotated with the signature most correlated with each component. see figure s4d for additional components. (b) traceplot of cd8 t cell activation signature (defined as mean expression across genes in signature in table s4) for all t cells along activation component. cells are projected along the component (x axis), and the blue line indicates the moving average of signature expression, using a sliding window of length equal to 5% of total number of t cells; shaded area displays se. (c) heatmap showing expression of immune-related genes with the largest positive correlations with activation component, averaged per cluster and z score standardized across clusters; columns (clusters) are ordered by mean projection along the component. see figure s4 for additional components. (d) violin plot showing the density of all t cells (left), t cells in individual tissues (middle), and in individual clusters (right), along activation component. number of dots inside each violin are proportional to number of cells. (e) trace-plots (like in b) of (left) exhaustion/terminal differentiation signature along second component and (right) hypoxia signature along third component. signatures are presented in table s4. (f) heatmap of cells projected on each diffusion component (rows) averaged by cluster (columns).']. Reference sentences:[the mean expression of the activation signature steadily increases along the component (figure 4b) with a concomitant gradual increase in expression of specific activation-related genes (figure 4c).intratumoral t cell popula- tions including treg and effector memory t cells are enriched at the activated end of the component (t test p = 0.0; figures 4a and 4d) while naive peripheral blood t cells congregate at the least activated terminus consistent with their quiescent state (t test p = 0.0; figure 4d).though the mean expression levels of clusters gradually vary along the component there is a wide range of activation states within each cluster (figure 4d).genes most correlated with the component are known to increase upon activation and progressive differentiation including cytolytic effector molecules granzymes a and k (gzma and gzmk) pro-inﬂammatory cytokines (interleukin-32 [il-32]) cytokine re- ceptor subunits (il2rb) chemokines (ccl4 ccl5) and their re- ceptors (cxcr4 ccr5) (figure 4c).the next most informative component of variation was labeled ‘‘terminal differentiation’’ (figure 4e); the genes most correlated with it include co-stimulatory molecules (cd2 gitr ox40 and 4-1bb) as well as co-inhibitory receptors (ctla-4 and tigit) (figure s4b).however there are also important differences including the markers of exhaustion listed above and the order of clusters differs along the 2 components (figure 4f).this analysis also reproduced a continuous gradient along the t cell activation trajectory (figure s6c) similar to that seen in figure 4d.the next components were labeled as t cell activation terminal exhaustion and hypoxia respectively (figure 4a) as they were most highly correlated with the corresponding gene signatures (table s4).additional details on t cell diffusion components related to figure 4 (a) hartigan’s dip test on density of cells projected on diffusion components showing statistically significant continuity (lack of ‘‘dips’’) in cells along t cell activation component (component 3 third panel from left); other components exhibit more defined states (multimodality) (p < 0.05).see figure 4 for additional component.]
Summary: Trajectory analysis reveals activation, terminal differentiation, exhaustion, and hypoxia patterns in single cells, with distinct gene expression profiles along each component.

Text 70
10.1038/s41467-018-04827-z
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 3 identification and characterization of distinct aundiff populations. a oct4-gfp− and oct4-gfp+ aundiff fractions were isolated from plzf-mc/creer; oct4-gfp adults for gene expression profiling by microarray. aundiff fraction is mcherry+ cd9+ c-kit−. b confirmation of gene expression signatures of oct4-gfp− and oct4-gfp+ aundiff by quantitative rt-pcr. candidate genes were selected from microarray analysis of a. expression levels are corrected to those of β-actin and normalized so mean value of gfp− or gfp+ fractions equals 1. mean values from 3-5 mice ± s.e.m. are indicated. genes enriched in oct4-gfp− and oct4-gfp+ populations are shown in separate groups. control genes plzf and vasa are shown. significance was calculated by two-tailed student’s t-test (p < 0.05, p < 0.01, p < 0.001). c visne maps derived from single cell analysis of 150 single aundiff cells isolated from pooled adult plzfmc/creer testis. based on expression of a total of 71 genes identified from analysis of aundiff fractions in b plus genes previously linked with aundiff function. relative expression of selected genes associated with stem and progenitor fractions by each plotted cell is indicated (red = high, blue = low). d visne maps from single cell analysis of c. spermatogonial and germ cell markers are in left panels. middle panels show stem cell markers not identified as differentially expressed in oct4-gfp− and gfp+ aundiff fractions by microarray. differentiation markers are in right panels. e aundiff isolated from 2 plzfmc/creer; oct4-gfp adults were analysed by single cell rna-seq and developmental trajectory calculated using monocle. cells were classified as follows: stem cells (gfra1 or etv5 positive), progenitors (sox3 or upp1 positive), transitional cells (positive for combinations of stem and progenitor genes) and undefined undiff (negative for these stem and progenitor genes). f−h expression of indicated genes across cell trajectory (pseudotime) from single cell analysis of aundiff in e. expression of housekeeping gene ubc is shown']. Reference sentences:[to gain insight into aundiff heterogeneity we performed gene expression profiling of oct4-gfp− and gfp+ aundiff (fig 3a and supplementary data 1).from a panel of differentially expressed genes selected according to potential relevance for stem cell function we confirmed gene expression signatures of oct4-gfp− and gfp+ aundiff by qrt-pcr (fig 3b).control genes plzf and vasa were comparably expressed (fig 3b).genes associated with pluripotency and embryonic germ cells were co-enriched with oct4 in the gfp+ progenitor fraction (dppa2 dppa3 gdf3 lin28a prdm14 tdh utf1) (fig 3b and supplementary data 1).projection of expression of a gene of interest in colour allows visualization of cell subsets marked by that gene (fig 3c and supplementary fig 2e).expression of genes broadly active in aundiff (plzf sall4 vasa) was found throughout the plot (fig 3d).while expression of stem cell genes bcl6b and id4 was most evident within the stem cell fraction they were detected in progenitors (fig 3d).pax7 was expressed sporadically (fig 3d)35.expression of differentiation markers kit and stra8 was detected particularly in transitional cells (fig 3d).developmental regulators eomes pdx1 t and lhx1 marked a subset of gfra1-expressing cells at one extremity of the visne map furthest from progenitors indicating that gene expression was distinct (fig 3c).however expression of oct4 and other pluripotency genes were similarly enriched in oct4-gfp+ aundiff supporting reporter validity (fig 3b).trajectory calculations were performed in semi-supervised mode using expression of genes associated with stem (gfra1 etv5) and progenitor (sox3 upp1) populations (fig 3c) to identify the developmental pathway.a trajectory was obtained from cells only expressing one or both stem markers to those only expressing one or both progenitor markers (fig 3e).transitional cells were defined as expressing combinations of stem and progenitor markers and were distributed along the trajectory with tendency to concentrate mid-trajectory (fig 3e).expression of progenitor genes ngn3 and rarg increased as cells progressed along the trajectory indicating that it recapitulated stem to progenitor transition (fig 3f).oct4 expression increased at late pseudotime in agreement with oct4-gfp expression in progenitors (fig 3f).stra8 expression increased mid-pseudotime confirming transient induction upon stem cell commitment (fig 3d f).expression of developmental regulators eomes lhx1 and pdx1 was limited to initial trajectory stages consistent with stem cell expression (fig 3c g).id4 was expressed throughout the trajectory but with increased levels at early points indicating preferential but not exclusive stem cell expression (fig 3d g).other stem cell-associated genes expressed in early trajectory were confirmed e.g. nefm smad6 and tcl1 (fig 3h).examination of differentially expressed genes along the trajectory revealed three clusters corresponding to genes down- regulated (stem cell-associated) upregulated (progenitor-related) or transiently upregulated across pseudotime (supplementary fig 3).expression of stem cell-associated genes identified from previous analysis (fig 3b) including egr2 eomes etv5 gfra1 lhx1 lhx2 pdx1 smad6 t and tcl1 were enriched in the pdx1+ population (fig 5f).]
Summary: Identification and characterization of distinct cell populations along a developmental trajectory based on gene expression patterns.

Text 71
10.1038/s41590-018-0160-9
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 3 | ligand potency determines activation rate. a, surface expression of cd69 and cd25 on ot-i cd8+ t cells stimulated for 6h with n4, t4, g4 or np68 (horizontal axis; wedge below indicates ligand potency) and sorted for analysis by scrna-seq; results presented as a ‘violin plot’ (second independent experiment, supplementary fig 3a). each symbol represents an individual cell: n=45 (n4), 44 (t4), 48 (g4) or 47 (np68). b, activation trajectory fitted by diffusion pseudotime analysis to the transcriptomic data (scrna-seq analysis) of ot-i cd8+ t cells left unstimulated or stimulated for 6h with n4, t4, g4 or np68 or for 3h with n4 (key). each symbol represents an individual cell: n=91 (n4 6h), 91 (t4 6h), 94 (g4 6h), 93 (np68 6h), 64 (n4 3h) or 44 (us). data are pooled from two independent experiments. c, distribution of cells along the pseudotime transcriptomic activation trajectory fit in b, separated by stimulation condition (horizontal axis).']. Reference sentences:[protein profiling revealed that lowering the ligand potency increased heterogeneity in protein markers of early activation (fig 3a and supplementary fig 3a).using diffusion pseudotime analysis we fitted a trajectory to the cells and found that it tracked activation status (fig 3b).as noted for protein expression in the early hours of activation lowering the ligand potency resulted in greater heterogeneity in progress along the activation trajectory (fig 3c).a surface expression of cd69 and cd25 on ot-i cd8+ t cells stimulated for 6 h with n4 t4 g4 or np68 (horizontal axis; wedge below indicates ligand potency) and sorted for analysis by scrna-seq; results presented as a ‘violin plot’ (second independent experiment supplementary fig 3a).cd69 expression could therefore be used as an independently measured feature to control for activation state in a differential rna-expression analysis of cells treated with the various ligands (supplementary fig 3b).this included downregulated expression of chemokine-encoding genes such as xcl1 ccl3 and ccl4 particularly in cells stimulated with the low-potency ligand (g4) and upregulated expression of genes encoding proteins with roles in the presentation of anti- gen by mhc class i such as psmb8 tapbp and b2m particularly in cells stimulated with the ligand of medium potency (t4) (fig 4bc and supplementary fig 3cd).likewise early transcription of gzmb which encodes the important cytolytic effector molecule granzyme b did not differ significantly among stimulation conditions when we accounted for cellular activation status (supplementary fig 3e).a gene-expression changes (log2 fold) in cells stimulated with t4 versus those stimulated with n4 (t4 v n4) plotted against gene-expression changes in cells stimulated with g4 versus those stimulated with n4 (g4 v n4) (peptide stimuli and potency fig 3) with each cell’s activation status accounted for (as defined by surface expression of cd69 protein (log10 values)) showing all 8854 genes tested and those differentially expressed (false-discovery rate (fdr) < 0.05) for t4 versus n4 or g4 versus n4 or the intersection of t4 versus n4 and g4 versus n4 (both) (key).]
Summary: Trajectory patterns of activation status in single cells based on ligand potency, shown by diffusion pseudotime analysis and distribution along the trajectory.

Text 72
10.1038/s41590-018-0160-9
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 1 | a burst of transcriptional regulatory machinery characterizes early t cell activation. a, flow cytometry of ot-i cd8+ t cells stimulated for 0, 1, 3 or 6h (above plots) with n4. numbers in quadrants indicate percent cells in each. data are representative of at least two independent experiments. b, principal-component analysis of scrna-seq data from cells sorted as in a (time, key), showing principal components 1 and 2 (pc1 and pc2). c, diffusion pseudotime analysis of sequenced cells as in b (time, key), plotted by diffusion components 1 and 2 (dc1 and dc2); curved line in plot delineates the pseudotime trajectory. d, analysis in c with symbol colors indicating clusters (key) in diffusion pseudotime. e, expression (key below) of the top 20 genes (one per row; right margin) transcriptionally upregulated in cells in the early-activation cluster, relative to their expression in cells in the resting and late-activation clusters; genes clustered by pearson correlation (left margin); colors along left margin identify genes encoding transcriptional regulatory molecules (tr) or not (bottom right key). f, expression of selected transcription factor–encoding genes in e, presented as box plots (middle line, median; box outlines, interquartile range; ‘whiskers’ extend up to 1.5×the interquartile range). each symbol (b–d,f) represents an individual cell. cells in b–f: n=44 (0h), 51 (1h), 64 (3h) or 46 (6h).']. Reference sentences:[we first profiled a time course of strong stimulation by sequencing the transcriptomes of individual ot-i cd8+ t cells after 0 1 3 or 6 h of activation with 1 µ m of the high-potency ot-i tcr cognate pep- tide n4 in the presence of the cytokine il-2 (supplementary fig 1a).protein profiles revealed a rapid drop in the expression of cd62l followed by sequential increases in the expression of cd69 cd25 and cd44 (fig 1a).the examination of surface protein measurements and application of principal-compo- nent analysis to the mrna data confirmed that despite the uniform activation stimulus these cells were heterogeneous during the first 6 h of activation (fig 1ab).fitting a diffusion pseudotime trajectory to the single-cell tran- scriptomic data we created a fine-grained map of activation (fig 1c and supplementary fig 1b).the distribution along pseudotime of all cells from the vari- ous time points revealed three clusters of cells: resting cells early activated cells and late activated cells (fig 1d and supplementary fig 1cd).filtering for dif- ferentially expressed genes uniquely upregulated in early activation revealed enrichment for the number of genes encoding transcrip- tional regulators (enrichment p value 1.8 × 10−9 (hypergeomet- ric test); fig 1e and supplementary fig 1e).in particular genes encoding members of the early response nr4a family of orphan nuclear receptors including nur77 (nr4a1) whose expression has been found to reflect tcr signaling activity2734–36 had their highest expression 1 h after activation (fig 1f).bc residual expression (after expression of cd69 protein was accounted for) of selected chemokine-encoding genes (b) or genes encoding molecules associated with the presentation of antigen by mhc class i (c) in scrna-seq data in cells stimulated with n4 t4 or g4 (horizontal axis) presented as box plots (as in fig 1f).we observed no inhibitory effect of excess n4 peptide on early- activation protein phenotypes (supplementary fig 1a).]
Summary: Trajectory analysis reveals distinct clusters of cells during early T cell activation, with upregulated expression of transcriptional regulators in the early-activation cluster.

Text 73
10.1136/annrheumdis-2017-212863
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 4 characterisation of procs, prehtcs and htcs, and the definition of htc subsets. (a) heatmap showing the scaled expression of the top 20 differentially expressed genes defining the proc, prehtc and htc populations. (b) boxplots showing the expression levels of transcription factors specifically expressed in different cell types. (c) monocle pseudotime trajectory revealing the progression of procs, prehtcs and htcs. (d) pseudotemporal expression dynamics of specific representative genes (corresponding to (a)) marking procs, prehtcs and htcs. all single cells in the proc, prehtc and htc cell lineage are ordered based on pseudotime. (e) t-sne visualisation of the htc-a and htc-b subpopulations. (f) heatmap showing the scaled expression of the top 10 differentially expressed genes defining the htc-a and htc-b subsets. htcs, hypertrophic chondrocytes; prehtcs, prehypertrophic chondrocytes; procs, proliferative chondrocytes; t-sne, t- distributed stochastic neighbour embedding.']. Reference sentences:[]
Summary: Trajectory analysis reveals the progression of cell types and subpopulations based on gene expression dynamics and differentiation stages.

Text 74
10.1136/annrheumdis-2017-212863
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 2 identification of chondrocyte populations and gene signatures during human oa progression. (a) visualisation of t-sne coloured according to cell types for human oa cartilage single-cell transcriptomes. (b) monocle pseudospace trajectory revealing the oa chondrocyte lineage progression coloured according to cell types. (c) dot plots showing the stage distribution in each cluster. heatmap showing the pairwise correlations. (d) heatmap revealing the scaled expression of differentially expressed genes for each cluster defined in (a). specific representative genes in each chondrocyte subsets are highlighted along the right margin. the colour scheme is based on z-scores. (e) dot plots showing the expression of indicated markers for each cell cluster on the t-sne map. (f) representative immunohistochemistry assay of indicated genes in cartilage tissues. scale bar, left, 500µm; right, 50µm. the scores of different areas (up, middle, down) in cartilage tissues based on the immunohistochemistry assay are shown. p<0.05, otherwise, not significant. ec, effector chondrocyte; regc, regulatory chondrocyte; proc, proliferative chondrocyte; prehtc, prehypertrophic chondrocyte; fc, fibrocartilage chondrocyte; htc, hypertrophic chondrocyte; homc, homeostatic chondrocyte; oa, osteoarthritis; t-sne, t-distributed stochastic neighbour embedding.']. Reference sentences:[]
Summary: Trajectory of chondrocyte lineage progression in human OA cartilage, with distinct cell clusters and gene expression patterns.

Text 75
10.1038/s41586-018-0393-7
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 2 | club cell differentiation varies by location. a, distal epithelia preferentially give rise to mucous metaplasia. immunofluorescence showing cells positive for acetylated tubulin (actub; ciliated cells) and muc5ac (goblet cells) in cultured epithelia from proximal (top panels) or distal (bottom panels) trachea stimulated with recombinant il-13 (right) versus control (left). scale bar, 200μm. b, c, differentiation trajectories. diffusion map embedding (b) of 6,905 basal (blue), club (green) and ciliated (red) cells coloured by cluster assignment (top) or expression (log2(tpm+1), colour bar) of krt13 (bottom). c, number of individual cells associated with each trajectory. d, e, krt13+ cells occur in hillock structures. d, whole-mount stain of krt13 (magenta) and acetylated tubulin (green), n=3 mice. scale bar: 500μm (main), 50μm (expanded inset). e, schematic of squamous hillocks within pseudostratified ciliated epithelium.']. Reference sentences:[we also recovered matching clusters using full-length scrna-seq of 301 epcam+cd45− epithelial cells from proximal and distal tracheal segments of c57bl/6 wild-type mice with the exception of goblet cells (n = 3; fig 1a extended data fig 2 3a b).indeed il-13-induced mucous metaplasia in cultured epithelia resulted in greater goblet cell differentiation in distal epithelium (fig 2a extended data fig 4b).we inferred trajectories of cell differentiation using diffusion maps (fig 2b c extended data fig 4c) and characterized expression programs and transcription factors that vary coherently in transitional cells that were pseudotemporally ordered along trajecto- ries that connect basal club and ciliated cells (extended data fig 5 supplementary table 7 methods).one of these trajectories reflects the known basal-to-club cell lineage path (dc1–dc2 k = 555 cells) but a second distinct trajectory connects basal to club cells through a newly identified transitional cell (dc2–dc3 k = 1908 cells) that uniquely expresses squamous epithelial markers krt4 and krt13 (fdr < 10−5 lrt; fig 2b c).we did not detect any cells transitioning from basal to ciliated cells (fig 2b c) consistent with the homeostatic production of ciliated cells from club cells122.surprisingly many krt13+ cells are located in contiguous groups of stratified cells that lack luminal ciliated cells (fig 2d e).for the analysis in fig 2h i the extent of goblet cell hyperplasia was assessed using counts of muc5ac+ goblet cells normalized to counts of egfp+ ciliated cells.to extract the edges of this manifold along which cells transition between states (fig 2a) we fit a convex hull using the ‘convhulln’ from the ‘geometry’ r package.article research extended data fig 2 | identifying tracheal epithelial cell types in full- length scrna-seq.cell–cell pearson correlation coefficient (r) between all 301 cells (individual rows and columns) ordered by cluster assignment (as in extended data fig 2d).goblet cell quantification (ln(muc5ac+/egfp+ ciliated cells)) in foxj1-egfp mice (n = 6 dots) in each of four conditions in (fig 2a).diffusion map embedding of 6905 cells (as in fig 2b) coloured either by their krt13+ hillock membership (left green) or by expression (log2(tpm+1)) of specific genes (all other panels).cells are pseudotemporally ordered (x axis all plots) using diffusion maps (fig 2b extended data fig 4c).]
Summary: Differentiation trajectories of basal, club, and ciliated cells, with a transitional cell expressing krt13 connecting basal to club cells.

Text 76
10.1371/journal.pgen.1007552
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figs). as atoh1 induction occurs at p12, we used the sc1 cluster as the starting points for the induction of chcs. the chcs separated into three distinct clusters (chc1-3) (fig 2a). closer examination of marker expression in these cells found that canonical hc markers chrna10 and pou4f3 were almost uniquely expressed in chc3 suggesting they are the most mature among chcs and that there is a progression from sc1 to chc1 to chc2 to chc3 [14, 21] (fig 2c and fig 2a). one important implication of this finding is that studying the previously unrecognized chc1 and chc2 that had undergone less complete conversion could identify factors that are needed to increase conversion efficiency. to provide additional evidence that there is a continuum of cells present during hc conversion, we next ordered the cells in pseudotime with inverse graph embedding using monocle2 [24]. the pseudotime reconstruction places individual cells in two-dimensional space in an unsupervised manner based on the relative transcription profiles of each cell. with this approach, the cells ordered along the anticipated trajectory of hc conversion starting with sc1 to chc1 to chc2 to chc3 (fig 2b). while transitioning from chc1-2 to chc3, canonical hc markers (myo6, rasd2, chrna9, pvalb, pou4f3, chrna10) started to be expressed (fig 2c). thus, inverse graph embedding of scs undergoing atoh1-mediated conversion further supported a continuum from a donor sc to a target state that resembled hcs. to identify additional tfs that may be required to increase the efficiency and completion of atoh1-mediated hc conversion, we plotted the expression of tfs that were found to be nonrandomly expressed across pseudotime using the beaming algorithm imbedded in monocle2 (fig 2c). as expected, tfs associated with the terminal differentiation of scs, such as rorb, rora, id1, id4, id2 [25, 26], decreased in expression as cells began undergoing atoh1mediated conversion. there was then a second cluster of genes that transiently increased in expression in chc1, such as hes5, hes1, sox9, zbtb20 and members of the ap-1 complex (fos, junb, jun). subsequently, the chc2 cluster was enriched with tfs such as hes6, insm1, jund and egr1, in addition to endogenous atoh1 and exogenous atoh1-ha. finally, the chc3 cluster highly expressed known hc tfs such as barhl1, lhx3, pou4f3 and neurod6 [27–30]. it has been shown that the expression of endogenous atoh1 is upregulated during naturally occurring hc conversion in zebrafish and birds [31–34]. in our data, endogenous atoh1 increases as conversion progresses (s2a fig); transgenic atoh1-ha expression strongly correlates with converted hc state (fig 2d and s2a fig), with chc3 expressing a 3.29 fold more atoh1-ha than chc1. this is unexpected because transgenic atoh1-ha is driven by cag promoter in cre-positive cells which should presumably have ubiquitously constant levels of']. Reference sentences:[]
Summary: Trajectory analysis reveals a continuum from initial to mature cell states during cell conversion, with specific transcription factors expressed at different stages.

Text 77
10.1016/j.celrep.2018.07.025
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 2. diversification of cell types in the mouse mammary epithelium (a) diffusion map of single-cell transcriptomes annotated by stage of collection. (b) a color gradient is used to depict the ratio of krt8 and krt14 on the same diffusion map. cells with much higher levels of krt8 levels than krt14 are green, and cells with the opposite configuration are red. orange/yellow color indicates balanced coexpression. sphere radius assigned by maximum value of krt8 or krt14. the right three panels represent immuno-staining of mouse mammary epithelium for krt8 (green) and krt14 (red) at the given stages of development. (c) placement of nmf groups in the diffusion map from (a) and their correspondence to markers of known cell types as indicated. sphere radius represents normalized expression values for the given factors. color, nmf group. (d) multiplex ﬂuorescent in situ hybridization for select lineage markers shown in (c), in adult and embryonic mammary tissue. insets in second lower panel, extreme digital zoom showing closeproximity red, green, and blue signals. (e) pseudotemporal vectors through the diffusion map from (a) color-coded to represent lineage branch points as shown in (f). (f) heatmap of regulon scores from scenic analysis. rows, individual regulons. columns, cells organized according to pseudotemporal trajectories as indicated below the heatmap. a, adult lineage oriented regulons; b, primitive regulons; onset of balanced lineage regulon activity. color coding is also given for nmf groups and developmental stage as in figure 1d.']. Reference sentences:[the resulting graph produced an intuitive developmental picture in which primitive (e16 and e18) and adult cells occupied opposite ends of the dc2 axis while p4 cells localized to intermediate positions (figure 2a).p4 cells distribute in a unique pattern along dc1 with a small group extending toward a tightly grouped set of adult cells (figure 2a bottom right quadrant) and a second larger group of cells extending as a single group toward the two major adult groups (upper right quadrant).graphing cells according to the ratio of transcripts for the well- known luminal and basal markers krt8 and krt14 respectively is concordant with in situ staining for the products of these line- age-associated genes over the same developmental window (figure 2b).that is we observed the following: (1) cells with mixed keratin expression predominating early (e18.5); (2) emer- gence of a minority krt14-expressing p4 population that corre- lates with a well-defined elongating myoepithelial cell layer lining the p4 epithelium; (3) a majority of p4 cells harboring a mixed lineage krt8+krt14+ phenotype but positioned proximal to adult luminal cell types in the diffusion map; and (4) the resolution of this group into cells expressing krt8 but lacking krt14 in the adult gland as would be expected for mature luminal cells lining the ducts (figure 2b).nmf1 corresponds to the figure 2.group of cells from mixed developmental stages with stromal expression patterns and was largely distinguishable from epithelial cells along a higher dc (dc5) (figure 2c).consistent with the predicted pattern of expression from scrna-seq multiplex in situ hybridization distinguished adult cells expressing krt14 both wfdc18 and krt8 or krt8 alone (figure 2d).by contrast most cells in the fetal mammary epithelium co-express all three markers (figure 2d).similarly targets identified in scrna-seq data as being commonly expressed in fetal mammary cells but not adult cells e.g. sostdc1 were identified in situ in fetal but not adult tissue (figure 2d).we constructed pseudotemporal trajectories for this simple lineage bifurcation model using principal curves through prox- imal populations in the first two components of the diffusion map although the data do not rule out other differentiation tra- jectories (figure 2e) (hastie 1989).among the differentially activated regulons identified by this approach were correlated sets that were highly expressed in one of the three adult cell types as well as regulons that typify embryonic and/or p4 cells and are downregulated as develop- ment progresses (figure 2f).each major adult cell type was also characterized by certain repressed regulons such as ehf for basal creb3l2 for alveolar and atf4 cebpd cebpb and yy1 for er+ luminal cells (figure 2f).while e16 cells were largely negative for adult-associated regulon activity there was a marked and balanced activation of regulons corresponding to adult cell types at e18 and this balanced pattern persisted into p4 cells (figure 2f asterisk).for instance elevated trp63 activity is evident in cells trending toward the basal branch while esr1 and spdef activity is upregulated in p4/nmf-iv cells that trend toward the esr1+ luminal group (figure 2f).the luminal determi- nant foxa1 was upregulated in most p4 luminal cells but was subsequently downregulated in the esr1= luminal cells of the adult (figure 2f).]
Summary: Trajectory patterns show differentiation from primitive to adult cell types, with distinct expression of lineage markers and regulon activity along pseudotemporal trajectories.

Text 78
10.1126/science.aau0730
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 2. joint profiling of chromatin accessibility and transcription in dexamethasone treated a549 cells. (a) scatter plot showing the proportion of human reads, out of all reads mapping uniquely to the human or mouse reference genomes, for cells in which both rnaseq profiles and atac-seq profiles were obtained. only hek293t (human) and nih/3t3 (mouse) cells are plotted. (b) t-sne visualization of a549 cells (rna-seq) including cells from both sci-car and sci-rna-seq-only plates, colored by dex treatment time (left) or unsupervised clustering id (right). (c) t-sne visualization of a549 cells (atac-seq) including cells from both sci-car and sci-atac-seq-only plates, colored by dex treatment time (left) or unsupervised clustering id (right). (d) t-sne visualization of a549 cells (atac-seq) with linked rna-seq profiles. if the cell is in cluster 1 (or cluster 2) in both rna-seq and atacseq, then it is labeled as “match”, otherwise it is labeled “discordant”. (e) distribution of cells from different dex treatment timepoints in gene expression pseudotime inferred by trajectory analysis. (f) smoothed line plot showing scaled (with the r function scale) gene expression and promoter accessibility of ckb and zswim6 across pseudotime. unscaled, unsmoothed data shown in fig s5, f and g. (g) smoothed line plot showing the scaled mrna level and activity change of transcription factors nr3c1 and klf9 across pseudotime. unscaled, unsmoothed data shown in fig s6, d and e.']. Reference sentences:[indeed 1423/1425 (99%) of co-assayed cells from those wells were assigned the same species label from both sci-rna-seq and sci-atac-seq profiles (fig 2a).unsupervised clustering or t-sne visualization of ei- ther sci-rna-seq or sci-atac-seq profiles readily separated clusters corresponding to untreated and dex-treated cells (fig 2 b and c).cells with concordant vs. discord- ant assignments did not significantly differ in read depth (p- value > 0.1 welch two-sample t-test) but notably fell on the border between clusters 1 and 2 in either t-sne (fig 2d and fig s4f).cells were ordered consistently with the time course (fig 2e).of note the aforementioned cells from 1 hour whose cluster assign- ments were discordant (fig 2d and fig s4f) occurred signif- icantly earlier in pseudotime than cells with concordant assignments (p-value = 3e-5 wilcoxon rank sum test fig s5b).there were eleven genes that showed significant changes in both gene expression and promoter accessibility along pseudotime (5% fdr for both) with well-correlated dynamics (fig 2f and fig s5 f to h).the motif of the ca- nonical glucocorticoid receptor nr3c1 was the most acti- vated even though its expression decreased (fig 2g) consistent with its activation by recruitment from the cytosol rather than by increased expression.consistent with this we observe that both its expression and its motif accessibility increase along pseudotime (fig 2g and fig s6 d and e).]
Patterns related to the trajectory of gene expression pseudotime inferred by trajectory analysis are shown in the figure.

Text 79
10.1016/j.cels.2018.07.006
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 1. hfib-myod is a human fibroblast line that converts to myotube-like cells upon doxycycline induction (a) immunostaining of hfib-myod and hsmm with muscle-specific anti-myosin-heavy chain (mhc) antibodies 72 hr post induction of myodmediated reprogramming with doxycycline (dox) or myoblast differentiation via serum switch, respectively. scale bar represents 100 mm. (b) counts of mhc+ cells, size of mhc+ cells in pixels, and total nuclei as measured by automated image processing scripts (see star methods). error bars indicate sd across replicates. (c) fraction of cells in which mrnas for selected muscle markers were detected via full-length single-cell rna-seq. (d) fold changes in average expression level of genes significantly differentially expressed (fdr < 5%) between 0 and 72 hr in differentiating myoblasts compared to their corresponding changes in hfib-myod. the blue line indicates a linear regression, while the red line illustrates perfect concordance. (e) the single-cell trajectory reconstructed by monocle 2 for hfib-myod cells undergoing myogenic reprogramming. cells start at the root and progress to one of three alternative reprogramming outcomes, denoted by f1, f2, and f3. to reach these fates, cells must pass through branch point b1. cells that do not proceed to f1 must then choose between f2 or f3 at branch point b2.']. Reference sentences:[although some markers of myotube formation such as eno3 were induced by myod others including dmd and myog showed expression patterns inconsistent with hsmm (figure 1c).the delayed cell-cycle exit may explain why hfib-myod wells contained greater than 3-fold cells than hsmm wells despite being seeded at comparable initial density (figure 1b).comparing average expression levels in cells collected at each time point revealed that few of the 653 genes that were signifi- cantly differentially expressed as a function of time in myoblasts were regulated to the same extent in hfib-myod (figure 1d).monocle 2 reconstructed a trajectory capturing the progression of single cells through myogenic reprogramming (figure 1e) which contained three termini (denoted ‘‘f1’’ ‘‘f2’’ and ‘‘f3’’) corresponding to three distinct reprogramming outcomes.we next assessed the expression of genes regulated in myoblast differentiation in cells at the three different outcomes figure 1. hfib-myod is a human fibroblast line that converts to myotube-like cells upon doxycycline induction (a) immunostaining of hfib-myod and hsmm with muscle-specific anti-myosin-heavy chain (mhc) antibodies 72 hr post induction of myod- mediated reprogramming with doxycycline (dox) or myoblast differentiation via serum switch respectively.at the 72-hr post-serum switch both cultures contain nuclei in myh+ cells as well as cells lacking myh (figure 1).]
Single-cell trajectory capturing reprogramming progression with three outcomes.

Text 80
10.1016/j.cels.2018.07.006
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 6. alignment of myogenic reprogramming and myoblast differentiation trajectories identifies insulin and bmp signaling as aberrantly regulated in hfib-myod (a) the dtw alignment (cyan curve) follows a dissimilarity-minimizing path through the ‘‘landscape’’ of possible ways to pair up points on the two pseudotime curves. the contours indicate levels of equal similarity between global expression profiles of typical cells at indicated hsmm and hfib-myod pseudotimes. hsmm and hfib-myod cells were aligned to minimize differences in the union of genes used to order the two sets of cells. (b) the distribution of normalized lengths of the warping path as reported by the dtw package for shufﬂed trajectories. shufﬂing was conducted immediately prior to computing all pairwise distances between points on the two pseudotime series. the red line indicates the length of the warping path (0.58) of the unshufﬂed data. (c) clustered heatmap of genes showing significant differences in aligned kinetic curves (fdr < 10%; likelihood ratio test; see star methods) after controlling for common pseudotime-dependent differences. each row shows a different gene. columns correspond to the log-transformed fold change of the curve for hfib-myod over that of hsmm at each point in the aligned trajectory. these values were further transformed into per-gene z scores prior to clustering. genes are clustered by ward’s method and tested for enrichment of genes in reactome pathways, with selected significantly enriched pathways shown. (d) aligned kinetic curves for the indicated marker genes, all of which show significant differential pseudotime-dependent expression.']. Reference sentences:[our algorithm aligned the hsmm and hfib-myod trajectories along a ‘‘warping path’’: a sequence of matchings between an hsmm and an hfib-myod cell such that the most transcriptomi- cally similar cells (and thus points in hsmm and hfib-myod pseudotimes) are linked (figure 6a).the alignment between hsmm and hfib-myod revealed extensive quantitative differences in expression kinetics between their trajectories highlighting several coherent clusters of genes missing in hfib- myod or aberrantly regulated relative to hsmm (figure 6c).myog in contrast was up- regulated far later in hfib-myod than hsmm to a lesser extent and in a smaller proportion of cells (figure 6d).(figure 6d) igf2 which drives myoblast differentiation in an autocrine loop (florini et al. 1991) was strongly upregulated in hsmms but not hfib- myod.(figure 6d) we thus hypothesized that high levels of bmp and insufficient insulin signaling were locking hfib-myod cells in a negative feedback loop preventing their efficient activation of the myotube expres- sion program.similarly incubating hfib-myod cells with an lsd1 inhibitor dramatically increased their conversion to myotubes in the presence of insulin (figure 6d).it is conceivable that a future algorithm that jointly learns trajectories for two or more processes simultaneously along with the mapping figure 6.]
Summary: Differential gene expression patterns along aligned trajectories between hsmm and hfib-myod cells, revealing aberrant regulation of insulin and bmp signaling in hfib-myod.

Text 81
10.1016/j.cels.2018.07.006
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 2. single-cell trajectory analysis with monocle 2 identifies three myod-mediated myogenic reprogramming outcomes in hfib-myod (a) cells along the trajectory divided into four groupings based on expression of cdk1 and eno3. contour plots indicate two-dimensional gaussian kernel density estimates. cells are colored according to the facet in which they reside. hfib-myod cells were ordered using genes that were both used to order the hsmm cells (as described in qiu et al., 2017a, 2017b) and also detectably expressed in hfib-myod cells. (b) pseudotime kinetics of cdk1, eno3, and tnnt2 from the root of the trajectory to outcome f1 (solid line) and the cells up to branch point b2. cells are colored by their expression of cdk1 and/or eno3, as in (a). (c) all genes expressed in a branch b1-dependent manner. each row indicates the standardized (row-centered) kinetic curves of a gene. the center of the heatmap shows the kinetic curve value at the root of the trajectory. proceeding from the center to the left of the heatmap follows the kinetic curve from the root along the trajectory to outcome f1. proceeding to the right yields the curve from the root to b2. the curve values for each gene are normalized to z scores to facilitate comparison of genes kinetics.']. Reference sentences:[while eno3 and tnnt2 were upregulated to a similar extent on both paths cdk1 levels dropped markedly in cells traveling to the branch b2 but remained high in cells traveling to f1 (figure 2b).(figure 2c; table s1).like matcher our algorithm assumes the cells proceed through linear biological process figure 2.the alternative trajectories produced by changing the ordering genes or regularization parameters have some topological fea- tures in common with the one shown in figure 2a but each failed to segregate the cells of the ‘‘reprogramming failure’’ and ‘‘partial reprogramming’’ outcomes onto distinct paths.cells are colored as in figure 2a.]
Summary: Trajectory analysis reveals distinct outcomes based on gene expression changes along a single-cell developmental path.

Text 82
10.1016/j.cels.2018.07.006
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 5. core trajectories of myogenic reprogramming and differentiation the core trajectories of hfib-myod (left) and hsmm (center) were aligned using dynamic time warping (giorgino, 2009; rabiner and juang, 1993; vintsyuk, 1972) (dtw; right), a dynamic-programming time series alignment technique, which matches pseudotime coordinates on the hfib-myod trajectory to the most best matching points in the hsmm trajectory as determined by similarity in global expression.']. Reference sentences:[(figure 5; data s1).furthermore while the importance of engaging regulatory feedback loops for reprogramming differentiation and maintenance of the pluripotent and other cellular states is figure 5.]
Summary: Alignment of core trajectories in single-cell reprogramming and differentiation using dynamic time warping based on global expression similarity.

Text 83
10.1016/j.cub.2018.07.062
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 4. tf expression during development of glutamatergic lineages (a) pseudotemporal ordering of early glutamatergic cells (clusters 5, 23, 39, 21, and 22) by monocle 2, showing bifurcation of cells into two primary lineages. the dashed line represents the trajectory of gnps; the solid line represents the trajectory of glutamatergic cn cells. cells are colored by sample date. (b) expression of gnp and glutamatergic cn marker genes along the two primary branches ordered in pseudotime. dashed lines represent expression in gnps; solid lines represent expression in glutamatergic cn cells. cells are colored by sample date. (c) branched heatmap showing tfs with highly significant branch-specific expression patterns in pseudotime (q values less than 5 3 10à5). the root of the tree is in the middle of the plot and expression from the earliest to the most differentiated neurons of the glutamatergic cn is progressing to the left while the gnp progression is shown as the heatmap moves to the right of the root.']. Reference sentences:[as seen in figure 4a the cells ordered largely based on sample date with a single major bifurcation which we conjectured was the progenitors branching into the glutamatergic cns and gnps.to test that assertion we mapped known markers onto the pseudotime tree and confirmed unique expression of pax6 zic1 and neurod1 in the putative gnps as well as meis2 and lhx9 in the putative glutamatergic cns (figure 4b).we then used monocle 2 to create a heatmap that shows the branch-specific expression patterns of these candidates along each of the two primary developmental pathways (glutamatergic cns versus gnps) (figure 4c).the correlation network contains edges between tfs with pearson correlation coefficients greater than or equal to 0.20 and nodes are colored according to the sample date of cells with the highest mean expression of the candidate tf (figure 4d).as an illustration of the utility of this interface we repeated the analyses performed in figure 4.]
Summary: Trajectory analysis reveals bifurcation of cells into two lineages, with branch-specific TF expression patterns in pseudotime, distinguishing glutamatergic cns and gnps.

Text 84
10.1016/j.cell.2018.09.009
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 2. dynamic changes in cellular composition and gene expression during lung development (a) projection of cells from different time points on the 2d map. (b and c) cell type distribution of the immune (cd45+) (b) and non-immune (cd45à) (c) compartments across time points. time points in (a)–(c) are pooled over several correlated biological replicates at close time intervals (figures s2a and s2b; table s1). (d) dynamic changes in macrophage compartment composition plotted before and after birth (hours; t0 = birth). dots represented biological samples (n = 15). trend line is computed by local regression (loess). (e) suggested trajectory from monocytes to macrophage ii–iii on the 2d map. (f) gene expression profiles of monocytes and macrophage ii–iii cells ordered according to slingshot pseudo-time trajectory (star methods). lower color bars indicate annotation by cell type (middle) and time point of origin (bottom). (g) expression of hallmark monocyte and macrophage genes across meta-cells. meta-cells are ordered by median pseudo-time; five leftmost meta-cells are macrophage i.']. Reference sentences:[starting from late pregnancy all major immune cell populations were pre- sent and later dynamics showed a steady increase in the lymphoid cell compartment (b and t cells) which reached up to 32% of the immune population on day 7 pn and changes in the composition of the macrophage population (figure 2b).these subsets appeared in waves during development with macrophage i domi- nating in early pregnancy macrophage ii culminating around birth and macro- phage iii steadily increasing since late pregnancy stage and becoming the ma- jority on day 7 pn (figure 2d).notably macrophage subsets ii–iii form a contin- uous transcriptional spectrum with e16.5 monocytes (figure 2e) suggesting that macrophages ii and iii differentiate from fetal liver monocytes rather than from macrophage subset i which might have a yolk sac origin (ginhoux 2014; tan and krasnow 2016) (figure 2e).to infer the most probable differentiation trajectory for monocytes and macrophage subsets we used slingshot for pseudo-time inference (street et al. 2017) and characterized a gradual acquisition of macrophage genes from e18.5 onward (late e figure 2f).cellular dynamics during lung development related to figure 2 (a and b) pearson correlation of meta-cell distribution in biological replicates along different time points for the immune (a) and non-immune (b) compartments.meta-cells are ordered by median pseudo-time (figure 2f); five leftmost meta- cells are macrophage i.]
Dynamic changes in cell composition and gene expression along a suggested trajectory from monocytes to macrophage ii-iii during lung development.

Text 85
10.1038/s41467-018-06639-7
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 2 single-cardiomyocyte trajectory analysis. a single-cardiomyocyte trajectory after tac operation reconstructed by monocle. cells are colored by the time when cardiomyocytes were extracted (left), according to the cell clusters (middle), and by the cell states annotated by monocle (right). b bar plot showing the distribution of the cell states (state 1, state 2, and state 3) at each time point (left) and in each cell cluster (right). c module expression dynamics along the pseudo-time reconstructed by monocle. dot colors indicate state colors, matching the colors in b. single-cell expression levels of each module in sham cardiomyocytes are represented as black dots (left). the fitted curves for the trajectory into state 2 (green) and state 3 (blue), and the number of genes assigned to the corresponding modules are also shown. d heatmap showing the expression levels of differentially expressed genes during the trajectory. corresponding modules are also denoted in parentheses']. Reference sentences:[hierarchical clustering revealed that cardiomyocytes from sham and tac mice were well clustered (supplementary fig 2a).principal component analysis showed that cardiomyocytes from different batches at the same time points were located close to each other (supplementary fig 2b).principal component 1 (pc1) values were correlated with the number of expressed genes and cells with high pc1 values were enriched for cardiomyocytes from mice at 3 days and 1 week after tac operation (supplementary fig 2c).hierarchical clustering also revealed that some genes thought to be specifically expressed in endothelial cells (e.g. cav1 and pecam1) or fibroblasts (e.g. dcn and lum) were clustered together with genes essential for transcription; cav1 and pecam1 were in g7 and dcn and lum were in g8 (supplementary fig 2a).we next used monocle1920 to reconstruct the branched trajectory of cardio- myocyte remodeling after pressure overload which consisted of three cell states and one branch point (fig 2a).cardiomyocytes of the early stage after tac operation (d3 and w1) mainly belonged to state 1 (fig 2b) suggesting that cardiomyocytes enter into state 1 immediately after tac operation and were bifurcated into distinct cell fates (states 2 and 3) after the branch point.pseudo-time analysis revealed the transcriptional dynamics during the trajectory of cardiomyocyte remodeling (fig 2c d).in addition m1 m11 and m12 were activated whereas m3 and m5 were repressed after pressure overload (fig 2c).cardiomyocytes near the branch point were mainly from mice at 2 or more weeks after tac operation (fig 2a) suggesting that the bifurcation occurs in the late stage of hypertrophy.module expression dynamics along the pseudo-time line (fig 2c) showed that the induction of state 2 (cardiomyocytes that escaped from the induction into failing cardiomyocytes) is characteristic for the activation of m5 (tricarboxylic acid cycle and fatty acid degradation).differential expression analysis with pseudo- time analysis confirmed that m3 genes (e.g. atp2a2 myl2 and myl3) and m24 genes (e.g. ttn myom1 and alpk3) were activated whereas m1 genes (e.g. mrpl42 cﬂ2 and timm17a) were repressed in the induction of state 3 (fig 2d).the characteristic module dynamics such as m1 repression and m3 activation were observed from the later stage of adaptive hypertrophy (fig 2).]
Summary: Trajectory analysis reveals cell state transitions and module expression dynamics during cardiomyocyte remodeling after pressure overload.

Text 86
10.1016/j.cell.2018.10.038
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure s3. the distribution of exhaustion and memory markers across the six clusters and summary of trajectory analysis, related to figure 4 (a) tsne plot colored such that single-cells with a high expression level (log2(tpm+1)>2) of entpd1, havcr2, pdcd1, lag3, tigit, tcf7, tnf, and il7r are colored in red, and those with a low expression level (log2(tpm+1)<2) are colored in gray. bar plots (to the right) summarize the corresponding percentages of each gene in the 6 identified clusters. (b) tsne plot of all cd8+ t cells profiled with coloring of cd8_5 cells associated with baseline (blue, left) or post-treatment lesions (green, right). (c) tsne plot of all cd8+ t cells profiled with coloring of cd8_5 cells associated with responder (blue, left) or non-responder lesions (green, right). (d) violin plots showing organization of cells corresponding to the six cd8 clusters by pseudotime as inferred by monocle. (e) cell expression profiles in a two-dimensional independent space for each cluster (cd8_1 to 6) is shown. solid black line indicates the main diameter path of the minimum spanning tree (mst) and provides the backbone of monocle’s pseudotime ordering of the cells. each dot represents an individual cell colored by cluster.']. Reference sentences:[]
Summary: Trajectory analysis reveals the organization of cells in pseudotime, showing progression and differentiation patterns across clusters of single cells.

Text 87
10.1038/s41586-018-0698-6
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 5c). for villous cytotrophoblast cells, cellphonedb predicts interactions of receptors involved in cellular proliferation and differentiation (egfr, nrp2 and met) with their corresponding ligands expressed by other cells in the placenta. hbegf, potentially interacting with egfr, is expressed by hofbauer cells, and pgf and hgf—the respective ligands of nrp2 and met—are expressed by different placental fibroblast subsets (fig 2b, supplementary table 5). by contrast, during evt differentiation there is upregulation of receptors involved in immunomodulation, cellular adhesion and invasion, the ligands of which are expressed by decidual cells (fig 2b). for example, ackr2 is a decoy receptor for inflammatory cytokines that are produced by maternal immune cells18 and cxcr6 is a chemokine receptor that binds to cxcl16 expressed by the maternal macrophages. expression of tgfb1—the function of which is to suppress immune responses19 and activate epithelial–mesenchymal transitions—and its receptor increases as evt differentiate. components involved in the epithelial–mesenchymal-transition program are upregulated at the end of the trajectory20 (extended data fig 5d); these include pappa and pappa2, which encode metalloproteinases that are known to be involved in cellular invasion. in pregnancy, a decreased level of pappa is a biomarker for pre-eclampsia and fetal growth restriction, which are associated with defective evt invasion21.']. Reference sentences:[]
Summary: Trajectory analysis reveals dynamic changes in receptor-ligand interactions during cell differentiation, including upregulation of invasion-related genes at the end of the trajectory.

Text 88
10.1038/s41467-018-07261-3
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 3 divergent developmental trajectories of drug-resistance in osccs. a, b distribution of naive primary cells and their drug-resistant/holiday models on tsne plots for hn120 (a) and hn137 (b). note the switching of hn120 cells between distinct phenotypic clusters as they evolve from epithelial hn120pri (cyan) to mesenchymal resistant hn120pcr (purple) and drug-holiday hn120pcrdh (dark-grey) cell states (a). also note the heterogeneity within the hn137pri population (spread of ‘red’ cell between two clusters), and the selective retention of the epithelial cell state in the hn137pcr resistant (dark green) and hn137pcrdh holiday model (dark red) (b). c visualization of hn120, and hn137 naive metastatic cells, as well as their drug-resistant counterparts on tsne. d clustering of hn120 primary and metastatic drug-holiday model with intrinsically resistant hn148 cells. e pca (basal/luminal genes) based hierarchical clustering of oscc-pdpcs and their drug-resistant/holiday models with pagoda, note the retention of basal/epithelial properties in hn137pcr, while gain of mesenchymal gene-signature in hn120pcr']. Reference sentences:[since both cell intrinsic and extrinsic factors may contribute towards drug-resistance we assessed the effect of the micro- environment on drug-resistant phenotype by generating sub- cutaneous patient-derived xenograft (pdx) models of hn120pri and hn137pri cells (fig 1e and supplementary figure 3).e f in vivo modelling of cisplatin- resistance in subcutaneous pdx models of hn120pri and hn137pri cells (also see supplementary fig 3a-g).the gating strategy for viable singlets is exemplified in supplementary figure 3a.corroborating the image-based analysis hn120pri cells clustered in a group (fig 3a) demonstrating relatively homogeneous transcriptome with higher expression of basal/epithelial markers.however the matched drug-resistant (hn120pcr) drug-holiday (hn120pcrdh) and metastatic (hn120met) cells acquired luminal/mesenchymal transcriptome (fig 3a).on the other hand hn137pri cells displayed transcriptional heterogeneity that could be sub- classified into ‘basal/epithelial’ and ‘luminal/mesenchymal’ cell- types (fig 3b).drug-resistant and holiday cells derived from hn137pri displayed a ‘basal/epithelial’ signature suggesting cisplatin-induced selection of a pre-existing sub-population (fig 3b).notably cisplatin treatment of the metastatic cells from both hn120met and hn137met induced selection of pre-existing mesenchymal cells suggesting a ‘selective sweep’ in metastatic populations28 (fig 3c).the hn148pri and hn148met cells clustered with the hn120 drug-holiday cells (hn120pcrdh hn120mcrdh) in a distinct luminal/mesenchymal group emphasizing the similarities between cisplatin refractory drug- holiday models and intrinsically cisplatin-resistant cell-state (fig 3d).drug-resistant cells from hn120pri demonstrated acquisition of emt-like features while those derived from hn137pri retained their epithelial-like phenotype (fig 3e).the gating strategy for viable singlets is shown in supplementary figure 3a.]
Patterns of cell state transitions from naive to drug-resistant/holiday models, with retention of epithelial or gain of mesenchymal gene signatures.

Text 89
10.1038/s41467-018-07540-z
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 4 photoreceptors undergo a transcriptional switch at onset of axonogenesis. a gene/gene plots showing expression of r type-specific markers sens, ro and b-h2 in relation to elav in epr (left panel) and lpr (right panel). b venn diagram of the gene lists for epr and lpr clusters. c feature plots on tsne for twit and ace show predominant expression of each gene in epr and lpr cells, respectively. d epr and lpr marker gene localization. left panel: fish for twit mrna, an epr-specific gene, shows expression in the mf and posterior until column 4. right panel: gfp enhancer trap for ace (green), an lpr top marker, was costained with sens (red). ace-gfp was detected after column 4 and in axonal projections (yellow arrow). the scale bar is 50 µm. e gene enrichment analysis for biological processes in und, epr and lpr. f monocle 2 trajectory using shown clusters. stages of differentiation are visualized, with the split of int and photoreceptor populations. lpr arise from the epr population, clustering consecutively in pseudotime. the position of the mf is shown by white arrowhead']. Reference sentences:[surprisingly cells expressing sens ro and b-h2 were found in both clusters (fig 4a) revealing lack of bias towards a particular photoreceptor type between epr and lpr populations.the comparison of top marker gene lists for epr and lpr revealed a significant overlap as the majority of epr markers were also found in lpr (fig 4b).we used twit probe for fish to localize the position of epr in the eye disc and detected its expression within a narrow band posterior to the mf ending at column 4 (fig 4c d).conversely the expression of the lpr-specific top marker ace encoding the enzyme acetylcholine esterase that degrades acetylcholine in synapses was detected posterior to column 4 and in photoreceptor axons in the basal compartment (fig 4c d).since 153 genes were upregulated in lpr in comparison to epr (fig 4b) we decided to further elucidate the differences between epr and lpr.in contrast epr and lpr showed enrichment for photoreceptor differentiation-related go terms (fig 4e and supplementary data 3–5).the progression of cellular differentiation was visualized on the plot; from und progenitor cells to ppn in the anterior through mf to int in the posterior and finally to epr and lpr (fig 4f and supplementary fig 2).]
Patterns of differentiation from undifferentiated progenitor cells to photoreceptors, with lpr arising from epr in pseudotime trajectory.

Text 90
10.1038/s41467-018-07604-0
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 7 putative differentiation trajectories of blastema cells. a t-sne plot of blastema cells colored by respective time point sampled. b distribution of pseudotime of blastema cells colored by time point sampled. c t-sne plot of blastema cell populations in the medium-bud-stage blastema. d blastema differentiation trajectories colored by blastema cell populations identified in c. syn. fibros synovial fibroblasts, endo. endothelial cells, faps fibro-adipogenic progenitors, wh wound healing, eb early-bud blastema']. Reference sentences:[as expected these cells cluster based on time point sampled highlighting the differences in transcriptional states during regeneration (fig 7a).we find that cells present in both the early- and medium-bud blastema exhibit bimodal pseudotimes suggesting that both time points had cells at earlier and later stages of differentiation (fig 7b).distal undifferentiated blastema) (fig 7d).in contrast pericytes endothelial cells schwann cells myo- genic blastema cells and osteoblast-like fibroblasts have distinct trajectories (fig 7d).in addition faps lie along the joint-like and synovial fibroblast-like trajectories suggesting that these cells are potentially an intermediate cell state between undifferentiated blastema cells and these tips (fig 7d).we plotted markers that defined the tip populations to confirm the potential tissue trajectory of each population (supplementary fig 7).while our data suggest that flb cells are capable of multi- lineage potential (fig 7d) it is not clear to what extent the for- mation of these cells is due to either recruitment of rare tissue-resident progenitors or de-differentiation of fibroblasts.similarly the osteoblast-like fibroblasts we detect in the medium-bud blastema may be derived from a separate cell population even during wound healing (fig 7d).in general it appears that fibroblast-like cells in particular the population of undifferentiated blastema have the highest degree of multipotency (fig 7d) which is consistent with pre- vious work34.]
Summary: Trajectory patterns of blastema cells show distinct differentiation stages and potential intermediate cell states, with fibroblast-like cells exhibiting high multipotency.

Text 91
10.1038/s41467-018-07604-0
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 3 the epidermis follows an outward differentiating trajectory. a–d pseudotime analysis of epidermis populations during homeostasis (a, b) and in the medium-bud blastema (c, d), shown split by overall pseudotime plots (a, c) and colored by seurat population determined in fig 1 (b, d). abbreviations used are small secretory cells (sscs), intermediate epidermis (ie), basal epidermis (be), basal wound epidermis #1 (bw1), intermediate wound epidermis (iw), and basal wound epidermis #2 (bw2). e expression plot of krt17 in epidermal cells captured at the medium-bud blastema stage over pseudotime, colored using seurat populations as in d. f–o representative rna in situ hybridization probing for krt17 across a time course of limb regeneration. magnification ×10 in f, h, j, l, n, ×20 in g, i, k, m, o. all scale bars are 100μm. n = 4 animals per time point']. Reference sentences:[for both the homeostatic and regenerating epidermis we observe an outward differentiation phenomenon starting at the basal epidermis/we which monocle assigned as the earliest point in pseudotime (fig 3a–d).the populations we postulate to be intermediate epidermis served as intermediate populations connecting the basal epidermis to the outer layer of sscs (fig 3b d).further we identify keratin 17 (krt17) as a gene that was differentially expressed over pseudotime with highest expression in the basal we populations and expression tapering as cells entered intermediate and ssc populations (fig 3e).the expression profile of krt17 over the course of limb regeneration verifies the correlation between pseudotime and real-time expression (fig 3f–o).immunoglobulin lambda like polypeptide 5 (igll5) (supple- mentary fig 3) and t cell receptor alpha constant (trac) (fig 4a) identified populations of b cells and t cells respectively.at wound healing we observe two populations of b cells the second a presumably mature b cell population negative for igll5 but positive for b cell receptor machinery (supplementary fig 3 supplementary data 3).these data further highlight the potential inﬂuence of immune cells on limb regeneration and raise the intriguing and unex- plored possibility that the adaptive immune system may be a player in limb regeneration (fig 4 supplementary fig 3).]
Summary: Differentiation trajectory of epidermal cells from basal to outer layers during homeostasis and regeneration, shown by pseudotime analysis and krt17 expression.

Text 92
10.1038/s41586-018-0744-4
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 3 | mapping reprogramming trajectories and timing of cell fate commitment. a, apoa1 expression in a subset of cells from time courses 1 and 2 (n=48,515 cells). fully reprogrammed ieps are outlined in red (cluster 1). b, density plot of the mean proportion of reprogrammed cells for groups of randomly selected cells (defined by cluster 1 occupancy; n=59 groups, 10,259 cells). randomized testing of 59 celltagmef/d3 clones (≥35 cells per clone, n=10,259 cells) identifies iep-enriched clones (n=20 clones, 6,128 cells; p<0.05) and iep-depleted clones (n=24 clones, 3,177 cells; p<0.05). c, clones spanning all time points were selected for further analysis. trajectories showing connections between areas of highest clonal density across each day of reprogramming for iep-']. Reference sentences:[downstream analysis focused on data captured using the 10x genomics platform (85010 high-quality single-cell transcriptomes merging time courses 1 and 2; fig 1e extended data fig 3a–c supplementary table 1).canonical correlation analysis19 demonstrates consistent rep- lication across the sequencing technologies and biological replicates (extended data fig 3d e).parallel capture of reprogramming and clonal dynamics using t-distributed stochastic neighbour embedding6 (t-sne) the 28-day reprogramming process resolves into 13 clusters of transcriptionally distinct cells (extended data fig 3f g 5a).within this subset 8% of cells are classified as fully reprogrammed ieps (fig 3a; extended data fig 9a b).by contrast we found 24 iep-depleted clones in which less than 3% of cells are classified as ieps (fig 3b).iep-enriched and iep-depleted clones are clearly segregated on contour plots suggesting the existence of discrete reprogram- ming trajectories; this is also supported by orthogonal pseudo- temporal ordering analysis (fig 3c d extended data fig 9c d).conversely these transition clusters are bypassed on the iep-depleted trajectory on which clones traverse cluster 4 on day 21 entering a putative reprogramming ‘dead-end’ by day 28 (fig 3e; pearson’s correlation coefficient r = –0.84).article research as early as day 6 (fig 3c) suggesting that they are established early in the reprogramming process.however fig 3f shows that celltagd3- descendant clones reprogram with similar efficiencies to each other and to their celltagmef-labelled parent particularly for those lineages reprogramming at high efficiency (pearson’s correlation coefficient r = 0.71; extended data fig 9f).article research extended data fig 3 | scrna-seq metrics and quality control of cell clustering.]
Summary: Identification of distinct reprogramming trajectories based on cell fate commitment patterns.

Text 93
10.1038/s41586-018-0744-4
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 4 | molecular hallmarks of reprogramming trajectories. a, identity scores of cells on the reprogramming (left, n=7 clones, 1,037 cells) and dead-end trajectories (right, n=7 clones, 1,037 cells, random downsampling from 2,270 cells) from reprogramming days 6 to 28. cells scoring >0.75 (upper red line) are classified as ieps, cells scoring <0.25 (lower red line) are classified as fibroblasts. b, violin plots of significantly different (p<0.001, permutation test, one-sided) gene expression between reprogramming and dead-end trajectories (n=14 clones, 2,074 cells). c, projection of mettl7a1 and col1a2 expression onto the t-sne plot (n=48,515 cells). d, colony-formation assay (e-cadherin']. Reference sentences:[of 85010 sequenced cells 55571 (65%) passed the threshold of at least two celltags per cell that is required for tracking (extended data fig 4).celltags are reliably detected over a 10-week period; although their expression gradually diminishes over time they are not silenced (extended data fig 4c 6b–d).by contrast partial fibroblast identity is re-established with progression along the dead-end trajectory supporting the suggestion that this rep- resents a reprogramming impasse (fig 4a).we did not detect significant differences in transgene expression between the two trajectories at these early stages suggesting that transgene expression level is not a bifurcation driver (fig 4b c extended data fig 10a b supplementary table 7).mettl7a1 an as-yet-uncharacterized puta- tive methyltransferase was transiently and significantly upregulated along the successful reprogramming trajectory (fig 4b c).addition of mettl7a1 to the standard foxa1-hnf4a reprogramming cocktail resulted in a twofold increase in iep colony formation (fig 4d).scrna-seq of cells reprogrammed with foxa1-hnf4a or foxa1-hnf4a- mettl7a1 reprogrammed cells shows that addition of mettl7a1 to the reprogramming cocktail results in a threefold increase in the number of cells entering the fully reprogrammed state (fig 4e extended data fig 10c–g).article research extended data fig 4 | celltag expression metrics.bottom staining of cdh1 protein in iep colonies emerging following three weeks of reprogramming (control shown is from fig 4d).]
Summary: Identification of reprogramming trajectories based on gene expression patterns and the impact of mettl7a1 on successful reprogramming.

Text 94
10.1016/j.celrep.2018.11.034
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 3. pseudo-timeline analysis reveals transcriptional changes during maturation and integration along distinct developmental axes (a) schematic sagittal view of the mouse olfactory system. inset: summary diagram of olfactory bulb adult-neurogenesis illustrating broad morphological and developmental changes throughout maturation of adult-born neurons. lv, lateral ventricle; rms, rostral migratory stream. (b) (top left) monocle2 pseudotime trajectory of adult-born neurons. cells are colored by pseudotime score, with dark colors representing immature cell stages and light colors representing mature cell stages. (top right) monocle2 pseudotime trajectory of adult-born neurons with cells colored by cluster identity according to figure 2. (bottom) adult-born neuron cluster density plot projected to the x axis of the bifurcating monocle2 pseudotime trajectory, indicating which arm of the timeline each cell type is located.']. Reference sentences:[(legend continued on next page) 2694 cell reports 25 2689–2703 december 4 2018 to examine the differential stages of their integration (figure 3a).cells arising from adult-born neuronal lineages were then ordered along a putative developmental trajectory (pseudo- timeline) from least to most differentiated (figure 3b).to further characterize the bifurcated trajectories we deter- mined the cluster composition of each branch (figure 3b right panel) and divided our analysis into two axes (figures 3c–3f).additionally we found that clusters n02-pgc-1 n03-gc-1 n05-pgc-2 n08-pgc-3 n10-gc-4 n11-gc5 n12- gc-6 and n14-gc-7 were positioned on axis a and clusters n06-transition n07-gc-2 and n09-gc-3 were located on axis b (figure 3b right panel).to compare the results of scenic with our previous expression-based clustering analysis (figure 2) and monocle2 pseudo-timeline results (figure 3) we performed t-sne using the binary regulon activity calculated by the scenic pipeline (figure 4b top panel).the resulting t-sne revealed a bifur- cated distribution of adult-born interneuron clusters that closely matched both expression-based t-sne (figure 2a) and monocle2 pseudo-timeline results (figure 3b).(bottom) regulon activity density plotted on the adult-born neuron monocle2 pseudotime trajectory calculated in figure 3.]
Summary: Trajectory analysis reveals transcriptional changes during cell maturation and integration along developmental axes.

Text 95
10.1016/j.celrep.2018.11.034
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 5. olfactory activity alters adult-born interneuron subtype composition (a) schematic view of olfactory bulb experimental procedures, which are detailed in methods. (b) two-dimensional t-sne representation of 16,302 adult-born interneurons colored according to experimental group. oc, naris occluded; tr, olfactory trained; wt, wild-type. (c) t-sne representation of 16,302 adult-born interneurons colored according to cluster identity. (d) shifts in adult-born neuron cluster composition for each indicated experimental condition plotted across expression-based t-sne (left and middle) and along the monocle2 pseudotime trajectory (right). pearson’s chi-square test residuals were calculated for the corresponding experimental group (left). discrete values were determined from pearson’s chi-square test (middle); if the p value was < 0.05, then clusters were assigned appropriate designation of increased or decreased (red or blue) based on their residual score. clusters with no significant composition shift are highlighted in gray (no change, p value > 0.05). see also figure s3.']. Reference sentences:[to investigate activity- dependent changes in the cellular composition of olfactory bulb circuits we analyzed differences between scrna-seq data from both olfactory-deprived mice and those trained on an olfactory-discrimination task (figure 5a).cell reports 25 2689–2703 december 4 2018 2697 single cell sequencing wildtype (wt) single cell sequencing naris occluded (oc) dissociate tissue into single cells dissociate tissue into single cells single cell sequencing olfactory trained (tr) occluded control 6 weeks 6 weeks go/no-go odors water reward on go trials naris occlusion control naris plug a oc n=5261 wt n=5431 tr n=5610 b n=16302 c n02 n03 n04 n05 n06 n07 n08 n09 n10 n11 n12 n14 chi-square residuals discrete cluster composition shifts -10 0 10 decrease no change increase discrete cluster composition shifts on pseudotimeline occlusion trained axis a axis b axis a axis b n10 d n04 n06 n07 n09 n02 n03 n05 n08 n10 n11 n12 n14 n04 n06 n07 n09 n02 n03 n05 n08 n10 n11 n12 n14 n02 n03 n04 n05 n06 n07 n08 n09 n10 n11 n12 n14 n02 n03 n04 n05 n06 n08 n09 n11 n12 n14 n07 cluster n02-pgc-1 n03-gc-1 n04-immature n05-pgc-2 n06-transition n07-gc-2 n08-pgc-3 n09-gc-3 n10-gc-4 n11-gc-5 n12-gc-6 n14-gc-7 figure 5.2698 cell reports 25 2689–2703 december 4 2018 compared the adult-born lineages in each of the three conditions (figure 5b).we implemented chi-square tests using an expected equal distribution of cells across all experimental conditions to assess statistically significant changes in cell distribution in each cluster (figure 5d).we observed that clusters n05- pgc-2 (th+) n09-gc-3 (rprm+) and n12-gc-6 (tpbg+) did not change in response to altered olfactory activity; however clusters n06-transition n07-gc-2 and n14-gc-7 showed sig- nificant differences following manipulation of olfactory activity (figure 5d).notably olfactory deprivation reduced the propor- tions of cells that comprise these clusters while olfactory enrich- ment increased the proportion of cells that comprised the clusters (figure 5d).interest- ingly clusters n06-transition and n07-gc-2 sorted to one arm of the monocle2 based pseudo-timeline while cluster n03- gc-1 n08-pgc-3 n10-gc-4 and n11-gc-5 segregated to the other (figure 5d right panel).we chose to analyze changes in the survival of this cluster because this pop- ulation showed the most significant changes in cell distribution following experimental manipulations (figure 5d).this observation is consistent with both the direction and relative in- tensity of cell distribution seen with experimental manipulations in single-cell-sequencing datasets (figure 5).together these data indicate that olfactory experience bidirectionally affects the developmental profile of adult-born neurons detailed by the pseudo-timeline analysis (figure 5d) and reveals that each arm of the pseudo- timeline oppositely responds to activity.axis-a-associated populations are increased following naris occlusion and reciprocally decreased after training (figure 5d).notably increased numbers of cells within the immature neuronal cluster n04-immature following olfactory deprivation and the reciprocal decrease in numbers observed with training imply that adult-born neurons undergo a more rapid develop- mental transition in response to sensory enrichment (figure 5d).our data also reveal two populations of developing adult-born cells that respond oppositely to olfactory experience (figure 5d axis a and axis b).]
Patterns related to the developmental trajectory of adult-born neurons in response to olfactory activity changes.

Text 96
10.1172/jci.insight.124928
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 1. single-cell rna sequencing of healthy bone marrow cells. (a) cluster identification visualized using t-sne. hspcs: hematopoietic stem/ progenitor cells; cdcs: conventional dcs; pdcs: plasmacytoid dcs. (b) single-cell trajectory analysis using umap/monocle 3. color is as in (a). (c) examples of canonical gene expression used for annotation. (d) reproducibility of technical replicates for single-cell rna sequencing. linear regression line displayed in gray.']. Reference sentences:[the resulting development trajectories clearly display the major lymphoid myeloid and erythroid lineages of hematopoiesis with correct ordering of developmental stages (figure 1b).trajectories of erythroid and myeloid lineages could also be created using an earlier well-validated version of this software (monocle 2 see supplemental figure 1) and were consistent with those observed for the full data set.annotation of cell cluster identities was determined using a panel of canonical gene expression with the expression patterns for a subset of these genes displayed in figure 1c.such clusters were typically well delineated for each individual sample when using cca in the context of the entire data set (supplemental figure 1).cell subtype quantification for each of these technical replicate pairs matched robustly (figure 1d).]
Development trajectories of hematopoietic cells displayed with correct lineage ordering. Canonical gene expression used for cell cluster annotation. Reproducibility of technical replicates shown.

Text 97
10.1002/stem.2963
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 4. pseudo-time analysis reveals the emergence of various retinal cell types during the differentiation process. (a) a pseudotime trajectory from the rpe, rgc, müller glia, cone and rod photoreceptor clusters was constructed using monocle. (b) order of cell emergence is shown by day and cell type.']. Reference sentences:[monocle [25] was used to analyse the highly vari- able genes from the mitotic rpe rgc müller glia cone and the rod clusters (fig 4a).this is likely to explain why these two clusters are not associated with the time line (fig 4a).]
Summary: Pseudo-time analysis reveals the emergence order of various cell types during differentiation process.

Text 98
10.1016/j.devcel.2018.11.032
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 4. dermal wnt activation is required for progression into a phase of dermal condensate maturation (a) density plots of control (beige) and pdgfracreer(lo);bcatﬂ/ﬂ mosaic mutant (gray) dermal cells across the dc differentiation vector (top) or pseudoorder (bottom), showing a relative block in progression along the dc trajectory by dermal cells from mutant embryos prior to the maturation phase at both time points. (b) frequency plots of wnt-active (green), other (gray), and dc populations (red) along the dc trajectory at e13.5 and e14.5 for dermal cells from control and mosaic pdgfracreer(lo);bcatﬂ/ﬂ mutant embryos. dashed lines indicate the points when wnt-activated cells progress along the trajectory and further on the trajectory when wnt-active cells undergo dc differentiation. (c) ish of mosaic pdgfracreer(lo);bcatﬂ/ﬂ and control embryos showing decreased expression of dkk1 and bmp4 by mutant embryos, while col1a1 expression is maintained. scale bars, 50 mm. related to figure 3.']. Reference sentences:[accordingly density plot analysis showed an accumulation of mutant dermal progenitors prior to an intermediate phase of the dc trajectory compared to control dermal cells indi- cating a relative block in differentiation at this stage (figure 4a).specifically wnt-acti- vated cells appeared to represent an intermediate cell popula- tion on the dc molecular trajectory (figure 4b) and those cells from a mosaic population of mutant and wild-type cells that could be seen within this intermediate stage and at the termi- nus were wnt activated (wild-type).consistent with this we observed a significantly reduced number of pdgfracreer(lo); bcatﬂ/ﬂ dermal (col1a1+) cells that expressed markers found within this intermediate stage bmp4 and dkk1 (figure 4c).consistent with this co-detection of lef1 and edu in the figure 4.]
Patterns related to trajectory: Accumulation of mutant cells at an intermediate stage, wnt-activated cells as an intermediate population, reduced expression of bmp4 and dkk1 in mutant cells.

Text 99
10.1016/j.devcel.2018.11.032
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 5. a placode-specific trajectory is detected at e14.5 (a) t-sne plots of wild-type keratinocyte populations at e13.5 and e14.5, depicting basal (krt14), suprabasal (krt10), and placode (edar, fgf20) populations. (b) overlaid diffusion maps of keratinocyte populations from both time points, highlighting placode (green), suprabasal, e14.5 basal, and e13.5 populations (right map). progression plot showing the fraction of indicated keratinocyte populations over the pseudo-order that corresponds to the placode trajectory (eigenvector 5). (c) expression levels of indicated genes across the placode pseudo-order at e13.5 (top) and e14.5 (bottom). related to figures s6 and s7.']. Reference sentences:[our combined scrna-seq and in situ data implicate wnt-activated dkk1+ upper dermal and peri-dc cells as a potential selective figure 5.]
Summary: Identification of a specific developmental path in keratinocyte populations at different time points based on gene expression levels.

Text 100
10.1016/j.devcel.2018.11.032
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 1. dermal condensate cells specify a molecular trajectory that begins prior to morphogenesis (a) illustration of hair follicle formation. (b) schematic of microdissected skin taken from e13.5 and e14.5 embryos. (c) visualization of scrna-seq skin populations for each biological replicate by t-sne dimension reduction. (d) dermal diffusion maps at each time point (bottom) and overlaid (top). (e) dermal trajectory showing sox2-expressing cells (red; >0.5 normalized expression). (f) average expression levels of canonical dermal and dc markers by pseudo-order along eigenvector 2. confidence interval is shaded gray. (g) dermal cell trajectory showing lef1-expressing cells (red; >2 normalized expression) at both time points. (h) average expression of wnt target genes by pseudo-order (eigenvector 2). (i) ish detection of indicated genes at e13.5 and e14.5. black arrowheads, dc; white arrowheads, peri-dc cells. scale bars, 50 mm. related to figures s1 and s2.']. Reference sentences:[hfs first appear as patterned epithelial thicken- ings (placodes) that are associated with underlying dermal con- densates (dcs) (figure 1a) (hardy 1992; millar 2002; paus et al. 1999; xin et al. 2016).the molecular identity of this ‘‘first dermal signal’’ is unclear but appears to be unpatterned and is thought to act on the figure 1.diffusion maps were con- structed using the dermal scrna-seq datasets obtained from e13.5 and e14.5 skin replicates (figure 1d).in addition to sox2 other genes known to be expressed by dc cells (e.g. bmp4 ptch1) were also upregulated in cells closer to the terminus of the trajectory (figure 1f).analysis of wnt pathway genes along the dc pseudo-order showed that expression of wnt target genes increased with increasing pseudo-order (figure 1h).those cells at the terminus of the e13.5 trajectory did not yet show sox2 expression (figure 6d) but expressed other dc-associated markers (e.g. dkk1 lef1) which are expressed by cells closer to the e14.5 sox2+ terminus (figure 1h).]
Summary: Single cells progress along a molecular trajectory, with differential gene expressions marking distinct stages.

Text 101
10.1016/j.devcel.2018.11.034
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 5. three waves of transcription factor and signaling molecule upregulation occur along the dc niche developmental trajectory (a) bulk rna-seq expression trajectories of upregulated genes from fb to dc2 comprising spearman rank clustered groups c (early, pre-dc peak), d (mid, dc1 plateau), and e (late, maximum at dc2) from figure 3e.']. Reference sentences:[we discovered three distinct waves of gene upre- gulation for pre-dc fate acquisition dc1 clustering and hair germ downgrowth stages at dc2 in both bulk (figure 5a) and sin- gle-cell (figure 5c and table s3) transcriptional analyses.we confirmed twist2 mrna expression in pre-dc by in-situ hybridization which is later shut down at the dc1 stage (figure 5d).in total we discov- ered 11 early-wave 16 mid-wave and 24 late-wave transcription factors (figure 5g) that followed these temporally restricted up- regulation patterns along pseudotime suggesting that a coordi- nated array of molecular changes is required for pre-dc to mature through dc1 and dc2.the global display as cumulative percent of total corroborates a resolution of 8 early 11 mid and 24 late upregulated signaling factors (figure 5k).]
Patterns of gene upregulation in three distinct waves along a developmental trajectory in single cells.

Text 102
10.1016/j.devcel.2018.11.034
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 7. model of dc fate specification and maturation during hair follicle formation (a) schematic depicting the developmental hierarchy and timing of pc and dc niche fate specification and maturation. unknown dermal signals induce pc progenitors. local wnt signaling activity upregulates fgf20. pc-derived fgf20 is first required for fate specification of dc precursors that are at a transitional molecular state toward the dc niche biological fate. fgf20 then regulates cell aggregation to form the mature dc niche. (b) key steps of the dc niche fate trajectory during the fb-to-dc transition. exit from the cell cycle and progressive loss of fb fate coincide with progressive acquisition of the dc niche fate through three upregulation waves of dc transcription factors and signaling molecules.']. Reference sentences:[through multifaceted signaling interactions be- tween pc pre-dc and unspecified interfollicular dermal fb fate-specified dc precursor cells centrally migrate to form the figure 7.]
Summary: Trajectory of cell fate transition from fibroblast to dermal condensate niche through upregulation of transcription factors and signaling molecules.

Text 103
10.1038/s41467-018-08079-9
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 3 empirical validation of layer i sub-clusters in the e14.5 cortex. a pseudotiming analysis of cortical hem (c.h.) cells (cluster 21-e), and reln+ and precursor-like sub-clusters of layer i cells. the curvilinear trajectory was fit using slingshot on a principal components analysis of gene expression zscores. b loess-smoothed z-scored gene expression of four marker genes over pseudotime. c–e co-staining of the cortical hem (boxed) with dkk3 (green), sox2 (blue), a marker of multipotent neural stem cells, and reln (red), a marker of differentiated layer i neurons. scale bar represents 50 μm. f– h co-staining of the cortical hem with dkk3 (green), eomes/tbr2 (blue), a maker for intermediate neuronal precursors, and reln (red). scale bar represents 50 μm']. Reference sentences:[to increase the precision of unbiased clustering we developed an iterative cell type refinement method (fig 1a supplementary figure 3 see methods) and identified 22 principal cell types at each age (fig 1b c supplementary data 1).we determined that the precursor-like cells of cluster 17-e represent an intermediate population between immature progenitors of the cortical hem and mature reln+ cajal-retzius cells of layer i (fig 3a).many of these cells expressed sox2 a marker of multipotent neural stem cells dkk3 eomes (tbr2 marker of intermediate progenitors) and some also expressed reln (fig 3b).we found that dkk3+ cells were present in both the cortical hem and layer i (fig 3c–h supplementary figure 20).we identified many cells that expressed a mixture of dkk3 eomes and reln strongly suggesting a transition between these two states and corroborating the transcript-level expression patterns described above (fig 3a b).]
Summary: Trajectory analysis reveals transitional states between precursor-like cells and differentiated neurons in layer I, supported by marker gene expressions.

Text 104
10.1016/j.devcel.2018.11.048
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 3. epigenetic and dna methylation processes are enriched in myt1+ endocrine progenitors (a) plsda of scrna-seq data to identify myt1+ against myt1à endocrine progenitors. x,y, and z axes are the latent variables generated by plsda. overlays represent myt1 expression levels on a variance normalized (asinh) scale. (b) go term enrichment analysis of genes upregulated in myt1+ endocrine progenitor cells compared with myt1à cells. highlighted terms in red are of interest to this study. (c) relative expression of elected tf genes in myt1+ (black) and myt1à(red) endocrine progenitor cells. error bars represent sem from n r 150 cells. p values (t test) were placed on top of each gene. (d) arx expression overlaid on p-creode trajectory in figure 1. cells with recognizable b and a cell features were circled. (e) relative epigenetic genes expression in myt1+ (black) and myt1à(red) endocrine progenitor cells. error bars represent sem from n r 151 cells. in panels (c) and (e), p values (t test) were placed on top of each gene. also see figure s3.']. Reference sentences:[this exclusion left 151 m+n+ and 399 m=n+ undifferen- tiated endocrine progenitors (figure 3a).upregulated genes in the myt1+ progenitor population were enriched for several bio- logical processes and molecular function go terms (figure 3b).the top tfs upregu- lated in m+n+ progenitors include neurod1 pax4 prdm16 rfx6 and runx1t1 (figure 3c; table s1) all having proved roles most connected to b cell production (benitez et al. 2014; mastracci et al. 2013; sosa-pineda et al. 1997; su- giyama et al. 2013).differential arx expression was observed only after cells gained recognizable b or a cell features on p-creode maps with b cells suppressing arx expression (figure 3d).54 developmental cell 48 49–63 january 7 2019 epigenetic factors regulates a versus b cell fate choice dna methyltransferase 1 (dnmt1) histone-deacetylase (hdac3) and protein arginine n-methyltransferase 5 (prmt5)3 were upregulated in m+n+ compared to m=n+ progenitor cells while lysine-specific demethylase 4a (kdm4a) was downregu- lated in m+n+ cells (figure 3e).because the expression of kdm4a was lower while prmt5 was higher in b-biased progenitors (figure 3e) a straightforward model is that higher histone methylation favors the b cell produc- tion.thus dnmt1 but not dnmt3b is the limiting factor for dna- methylation-mediated a versus b cell fate determination consis- tent with the finding that dnmt1 but not dnmt3a or dnmt3b was enriched in the b-biased neurog3+ progenitors (figure 3e).]
Patterns related to trajectory in endocrine progenitor cells, including gene expression, transcription factors, and epigenetic factors, were analyzed and compared between different cell populations.

Text 105
10.1016/j.devcel.2018.11.048
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 1. single-cell gene expression projects myt1-expressing endocrine progenitors preferentially toward the b cell fate (a–f) p-creode trajectory analysis of scrna-seq data from e14.5 ppcs depicting a, b, , and g cell differentiation from neurog3+ progenitors. overlays represent gene expression levels on a variance normalized (asinh) scale. shown are representative graphs from n = 100 resampled runs on n = 2 biological replicates. (g) expression of neurog3, ins1, and gcg plotted as a function of progression on p-creode trajectories in (a). x axis represents cell states traversed from progenitor to differentiated cell states. y axis represents gene expression levels on a variance normalized (asinh) scale. dotted lines represent the bifurcation point from a common progenitor (left) and cells projecting into b (top) or a branches (bottom) (right). (h) myt1 expression in b (top, 306 cells) and a (bottom, 114 cells) trajectory as they exit the common progenitor pool and progress toward b and a cell fates. (i) integrated expression of selected markers in cells of a or b biased trajectories, presented as per cell levels only including cells after the bifurcation point. error bars, sem from n = 5 p-creode trajectories generated by resampled runs. p < 0.01, p < 0.0001 by t test. (j) number of genes expressed in different sub-cell populations at high levels. only genes with levels > 0.1% of the total transcripts were counted. error bars, sem. also see figure s1 and table s1.']. Reference sentences:[progenitors then further branched into gcg+ a cells (figure 1d) and ins1+/ins2+ b cells (figure 1e).this analysis revealed that progenitors progressively lose neurog3 expres- sion while gaining b or a cell features in two separate trajec- tories (figure 1g).50 developmental cell 48 49–63 january 7 2019 the number of threshold genes (e.g. those accounting for more than 0.1% fraction of total transcript detected) progres- sively decreased as neurog3+ progenitors transitioned into neurog3= cells and finally to b cells (figure 1j).similarly when we parsed progenitors into myt1+ and myt1= biased populations the number of threshold genes decreased as well (figure 1j) consistent with them being partitioned into specialized fate.(d) arx expression overlaid on p-creode trajectory in figure 1.]
Patterns of cell differentiation trajectories from progenitors to a or b cell fates, with changes in gene expression levels along the trajectory.

Text 106
10.1038/s41590-018-0294-9
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 4 | single-cell trajectory analysis of fetal intestinal cd4+ t cells. a,b, t-sne embeddings of all fetal intestinal cd4+ t cells analyzed by mass cytometry (n=10,436) (a) and single-cell rna-seq (n=1,743) (b) at the onset and at the middle of the t-sne computation. colors indicate different cell clusters. c, a single-cell trajectory from the rna-seq data (excluding treg cells and proliferating cells) recovered by pseudotime analysis. colors indicate different cell clusters as shown in b. gray arrows indicate three small branches. d, three kinetic modules of pseudotime-dependent genes (n=1,376) depicted in a log-variance-stabilized expression heat map, indicating gene-enriched biological processes. genes confirmed by mass cytometry and flow cytometry are denoted by black labels, and genes involved in tcr signaling are denoted by gray labels. the dashed gray box indicates the coordinated expression profile of tnf, fasl and fyn. euclidean distance values comparing gene expression profiles for each ordered pair of neighboring cells along the pseudotime trajectory are shown in the graph (right).']. Reference sentences:[at the onset of the mass cytometry data computation where cells are grouped on the basis of major shared features cd25+cd127lo treg cells clustered separately from the other cells whereas the other cell clusters were ordered in a linear fashion with the cd45ra+ tn cells next to the cd161lo/–cd45ro+ tm cells followed by the cd161+ccr6–cd45ro+ tm cells and the cd161+ccr6+cd45ro+ tm cells consecutively (fig 4a).a similar phenotypic ordering was observed in parallel analyses of the rna-seq data although the klrb1+ccr6+sell– tm subpopulation aligned differently but remained connected with the klrb1+ccr6–sell– tm cluster (fig 4b).individual marker expression patterns at the middle of the t-sne computation validated the ordering of the clusters and the comparability of the mass cytometry and rna-seq data (supplementary fig 4ab).similar patterns were identified using diffusion map18 vortex19 and principal component analysis (pca)20 (supplementary fig 4c–f).on the basis of this analysis ccr7+ tn cells were separated from sell– tm cells (fig 4c).when we clustered genes according to expression patterns along the pseudotime trajectory cell-to-cell transitioning could be explained by the kinetics of 1376 variable genes which formed three large modules (fig 4d).the first module contained 540 genes associated with ccr7+ tn cells including sell ccr7 cd27 and cd28 (fig 4d).the highest activity of this transcriptional gene expression profile coincided with the transition of cells with a ccr7+ tn phenotype into cells with a sell– tm phenotype (fig 4cd).the third module contained 383 genes (fig 4d) 106 of which were associated with cellular activation and 0 1 2 3 tnfsf14 1 0 2 map3k8 210 3 il4i1 1 0 432 5 ccl5 3210 4 jun 0 1 2 3 cd40lg 0 1 2 tgfb1 3210 4 anxa1 210 3 cklf 1 0 32 4 clic3 210 3 jaml 0 2 4 il32 a 1 0 432 5 cd69 expression expression expression expression expression expression expression expression expression expression expression expression expression expression expression expression expression expression 0 1 2 3 0 1 2 itgae cd38 cd226-pe cd69-pe ccr4-pe 10–3 0 103 104 105 10–3 0103 104 105 10–3 0103 104 105 10–3 0103 104 105 10–3 0103 104 105 10–3 0103 104 105 10–3 0103 104 105 10–3 0 103 104 105 10–3 0 103 104 105 10–3 0 103 104 105 10–3 0 103 104 105 10–3 0 103 104 105 cxcr3-pe cd95-pe cd161+cd117– tm cells cd161– tm cells tn cells cd161+cd117+ tm cells treg cells b cd31-pe ccr7-af700 ccr7-af700 ccr7-af700 ccr7-af700 ccr7-af700 ccr7-af700 klrb1 +ccr6 – sell – tm cells klrb1lo/– sell– tm cells ccr7 + tn cells klrb1 + ccr6 + sell – tm cells undefined tm cells foxp3 + treg cells proliferating cells 0 1 2 cxcr3 0 1 2 ccr4 0 1 2 cd226 0.9 33.7 8.6 56.9 2.8 2.4 4.6 65.8 26.7 1.9 1.3 85.5 11.4 6.2 81.6 9.8 1.9 5.3 4.4 88.5 29.2 23.9 11.3 31.9 27.5 40.7 8.8 41.9 8.7 10.2 54.5 11.5 3.4 10.2 3.6 82.9 19.5 59.4 8.4 43.3 28.9 44.6 9.8 39.8 5.8 15.5 21.4 3.8 2.0 7.1 4.2 86.7 42.1 78.2 14.3 16.9 26.7 76.2 14.1 6.4 3.3 18.4 1.9 1.5 4.5 47.3 1.5 46.8 48.0 65.3 25.7 12.5 13.8 75.7 13.7 8.5 2.1 19.3 11.8 3.6 11.4 8.6 12.6 67.5 15.5 3.4 23.7 57.5 10.9 4.1 24.7 60.4 35.8 7.0 21.6 35.5 10.2 3.2 30.9 55.7 32.4 4.2 10.1 21.3 0.3 11.8 0.4 11.6 13.8 18.9 57.4 6.0 20.0 48.6 4.0 84.0 8.2 79.8 13.8 53.5 fig 3 | targeted analysis of memory-like fetal intestinal cd4+ t cells.several signaling cascades were also represented in module 3 including the mapk tnf il-17 and tcr signaling pathways (fyn lcp2 sos1 map3k8 kinase fasl and tnf) (fig 4d).the helper th17-associated gene rorc was expressed in module 3 (fig 4d).in addition the dynamic expression profiles of fyn fasl and tnf clustered tightly with klrb1 (cd161) (fig 4d) at the point in the pseudotime trajectory where ccr7+ tn cells were aligned next to sell– tm cells (fig 4d).although the th17-associated rorc gene was expressed by 1.3% of klrb1+ccr6+sell– tm cells (fig 4d) il-17a production was undetectable in all tm cells.the t-sne plots for rna-seq data shown in fig 4b were generated in cytosplore+hsne.the pseudotime analysis shown in fig 4cd was performed using the monocle 2 toolkit in r as described previously22 excluding unrelated treg cells.the top 1000 significant genes were selected as the ordering genes and reduced with the ddrtree method for the single-cell graph shown in fig 4c.variable genes were selected at a significant false discovery rate of < 10% clustered by pseudotemporal expression patterns and visualized in a heat map in fig 4d.]
Summary: Trajectory analysis reveals cell transitions and gene expression kinetics in single-cell data, highlighting pseudotime-dependent gene modules and signaling pathways.

Text 107
10.1038/s41590-018-0294-9
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 4b were generated in cytosplore+hsne. only genes with local standardization (>0.5) across all cells were taken into account. bar graphs and dot plots (showing mean and s.d.) were generated in prism (graphpad). the pseudotime analysis shown in fig 4c,d was performed using the monocle 2 toolkit in r as described previously22, excluding unrelated treg cells. briefly, the single-cell trajectory was inferred using the dpfeature unsupervised procedure to identify variable genes, and the dimensions were reduced using t-sne on the top high-loading principal components. the top 1,000 significant genes were selected as the ordering genes and reduced with the ddrtree method for the single-cell graph shown in fig 4c. variable genes were selected at a significant false discovery rate of <10%, clustered by pseudotemporal expression patterns, and visualized in a heat map in fig 4d. we performed gene list enrichment analysis using toppgene43, gene interaction network analysis using the biogrid interaction database44 and gene pathway analysis using the kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes45.']. Reference sentences:[]
Summary: Identification of gene expression patterns along a single-cell trajectory using unsupervised analysis and visualization techniques.

Text 108
10.1016/j.immuni.2019.01.001
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 3. reconstruction of treg cell recruitment from lymphoid to non-lymphoid tissues in steady-state (a) top two latent variables (lv) found with bgplvm for mln and colonic treg cells, with bln and skin treg cells mapped over the same coordinates. lv in the x axis is the most relevant one, and mapping of colon and skin subpopulations over it reveals a transition of treg cell identity across tissues. (b) gene expression in mln and colon (top) or bln and skin (bottom) over lv0 modeled into a sigmoidal curve. dashed vertical line marks the activation point of each gene. (c) sequence of activation of go biological processes across the transition to colon (top) or skin (bottom), evidencing a conservation between both trajectories (spearman’s rho - 0.61). see also figure s3.']. Reference sentences:[along the mln to colon trajectory laid out by lv0 treg cells are ordered from ctreg to etreg cells followed by nlt-like and lt-like treg cells and ending with the overlapping treg suppressive and treg nlt cell subpopulations (figure 3a ‘‘colon’’ density plot figure s3c).skin and bln treg cells were projected onto the latent space defined for colon and mln resulting in a similar subpopulation distribution (figure 3a ‘‘skin’’ density plot; see experimental procedures).we then used the inferred ln-nlt trajectory to identify the cascade of transcriptional changes driving adaptation to nlts by modeling genes with a sigmoid curve and find their activation or deactivation ‘‘times’’ (figure 3b; table s4; see experimental procedures).we found the gene expression kinetics along the adaptation tra- jectories to skin and to colon to be consistent (spearman’s rho = 0.61 figure 3c): t cell migration and glycolytic process are among the earlier events in both colon and skin followed by cell proliferation; cytokine production and fatty acid homeostasis emerge toward the end of the adaptation trajectory.gene kinetics along nlt adaptation (lv9) for each condition show 158 shared genes with 71% of which also present in the lv0 (nlt adaptation) lv2 10 2 0 1 2 lv0 (nlt adaptation) mln & colon 210 3 0 1 2 lv0 (nlt adaptation) bln & skin (cell density) treg cells subpopulations suppressive lnlt ke nl etregke stat1 ctreg a glycolytic process t cell migration cell proliferation locomotion immune system process cytokine production fatty acid homeostasis glycolytic process t cell migration cell proliferation locomotion immune system process cytokine production fatty acid homeostasis =0.61 0 10 20 30 40 t0 rank c 0 1 2 3 0 1 2 lv0 (nlt adaptation) log2(expression) sell 0 1 2 3 0 1 2 lv0 (nlt adaptation) log2(expression) tcf7 0 1 2 3 4 0 1 2 lv0 (nlt adaptation) log2(expression) rora 0 1 2 3 4 5 0 1 2 lv0 (nlt adaptation) log2(expression) tnfrsf9 0 1 2 3 0 1 lv0 (nlt adaptation) log2(expression) sell 0 1 2 3 0 1 lv0 (nlt adaptation) log2(expression) tcf7 0 1 2 3 0 1 lv0 (nlt adaptation) log2(expression) rora 0 1 2 3 4 0 1 lv0 (nlt adaptation) log2(expression) tnfrsf9 b suppressive nlt l ke nl ke etreg stat1 ctreg mln bln colon skin (cell density) figure 3.in agreement we observe gene expression changes associated with losing the lymphoid tissue identity and acquiring a peripheral tissue transcriptional profile (figure 3b).to determine the succession of biological processes go terms (figure 3c table s4) we used the approach above on all genes called de by switchde and plotted only the terms with at least two genes.]
Summary: Trajectory analysis reveals transitions in cell identity and gene expression patterns across tissues, with consistent biological processes driving adaptation.

Text 109
10.1016/j.immuni.2019.01.001
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 4. recruitment and adaptation of treg cells to the tumor environment recapitulates steady-state migration (a) melanoma induction strategy and sampled tissues. (b) t-sne depicting treg and tmem cells from tumor and steady-state skin, draining brachial lymph nodes, and spleen. (c) differential expression between skin and tumor treg cells. treg cells classified as cycling were excluded. (d) (top) latent variables found with mrd-bgplvm representing cell cycle (lv5) and non-lymphoid tissue recruitment/adaptation of treg cells (lv9). (bottom) distribution of cells based on tissue and condition and cell-cycle phase along the recruitment trajectory. (e) difference in activation time (t0) of genes in control and tumor. genes are classified as being markers of skin, lymph node, cell cycle, or other. colored points show mean ± mean se for each group. vertical dashed lines represent the mean ± se for all t0 values. t test between control and melanoma t0 indicates no change (p value = 0.2631), with t0 values having a spearman correlation coefficient of 0.65 between both conditions. see also figure s4.']. Reference sentences:[we therefore purified treg and tmem cells from b16.f10 mela- nomas or pbs controls 11 days after subcutaneous implantation into foxp3-ires-egfp reporter mice (haribhai et al. 2007) to produce a plate-based scrna-seq dataset (figure 4a; see experimental procedures).skin and tumor treg cells clustered separately (figure 4b).to this end we used the mrd-bgplvm algo- rithm (damianou et al. 2012) (see experimental procedures) to explore gene expression trends across treg cells from the control skintumorandrespectivedraining-lnstogether.twomainlatent variables were identified one explained almost entirely by cell-cy- cle-associatedvariability(lv5)andonemainlyassociatedwiththe lt-nlt signature (lv9) (figure 4d figure s4c).despite the similarities between melanoma and control trajec- tories cells from both conditions do not completely overlap and treg cells could be ordered by nlt adaptation between popula- tions (from least to most adapted cells: control ln melanoma ln tumor and control skin) (figure 4d).the model was run allowing for 12 lvs as output and the one highly inﬂuenced by tissue-specific genes but not cell-cycle or other genes was used as a migration trajectory for both conditions (figure 4d).]
Summary: Trajectory analysis reveals distinct migration patterns of treg cells between skin and tumor environments, with differential gene activation times.

Text 110
10.1016/j.cell.2019.01.017
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure s4. organoid modules recapitulate developmental gene expression trajectories but exhibit elevated metabolic stress across protocols, related to figure 4 (a) violin plots highlight the distribution of gene expression values in primary radial glia and organoid radial glia for genes correlated with radial glia maturation during normal cortical development. some genes like hmga2 and clu follow expected trajectories in vitro, and astrocytes, as marked by aqp4, only appeared in the oldest primary and organoid samples. (b) network map shows a core radial glia maturation module is preserved in organoids, with edges representing a correlation between genes r > 0.15. (c) scatterplot displays maturing excitatory neurons (the mef2c+, snap25+ subset of neurod6+ and sla+ excitatory neurons) from each dataset along the classifier for v1 (y axis, positive is v1-predicted) and along the classifier for pfc (x axis, negative is pfc predicted).']. Reference sentences:[]
Summary: Trajectory patterns of gene expression in radial glia maturation are preserved in organoids, with some genes following expected trajectories and astrocytes appearing in older samples.

Text 111
10.1016/j.cell.2019.01.017
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 4. organoid modules recapitulate developmental gene expression trajectories but exhibit elevated metabolic stress across protocols (a) scatterplot shows the correlation of genes to the neuronal differentiation signature as derived in organoids (y axis) and in primary cells (x axis). (b) histogram of r values indicating the correlation of the radial glia maturation network to sample age across primary radial glia (pcw8-22) and organoid radial glia (week 5–15). (c) areal identity of maturing excitatory neurons in primary tissue and across organoids as predicted by a classifier. first two columns indicate primary cells with known areal identity. (d) scatterplot shows the correlation of all gene co-expression modules to primary human cells (positive on both axes) versus organoid cells from this paper using the kadoshima protocol (negative on x axis) and a previous paper (camp et al., 2015) using a whole-brain organoid protocol (negative on y axis). modules are generated independently in each dataset and correlated to primary or organoid cell identity. glycolysis, endoplasmic-reticulum (er) stress, and electron transport modules show a strong correlation with organoid cells from both protocols. (e) violin plots illustrate the distribution of single-cell gene expression values for hub genes in the glycolysis and er stress co-expression modules from primary human and macaque cells (columns 1 and 2) organoid cells generated in this paper using the kadoshima protocol (columns 3 and 4), organoid cells generated using a whole-brain organoid protocol (columns 5 and 6; camp et al., 2015; mora-bermu´ dez et al., 2016), and a cortical spheroid protocol (column 7; sloan et al., 2017). see also figure s4.']. Reference sentences:[there- fore we used excitatory neurons from human primary visual (v1) and prefrontal cortex (pfc) to construct a classifier for areal identity (figure 4c).we used a likelihood ratio test (lrt) commonly applied to single-cell gene expression data and a general linear model to calculate differential b a c e d figure 4.]
Patterns of gene expression trajectories in single cells across different protocols, with elevated metabolic stress in organoid cells.

Text 112
10.1016/j.celrep.2019.01.079
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 3. temporal gene expression in cardiomyocytes (a) pseudotime trajectory showing the distribution of cms-v. cells are colored with developmental times. (b) curves showing dynamic expression changes in three gene groups (g1, g2, and g3) in cms-v. the number of genes in each group is shown at the top. solid curves show the overall trend of gene groups, and yellow indicates the density of gene trends. (c) representative go terms of each gene group. (d) fitted curves showing dynamic expression changes in representative genes in each gene group based on developmental time. red curves correspond to atrial cms, and blue curves correspond to cms-v. (e) co-expression network of tfs in early-stage cms. (f) co-expression network of tf-associated target genes in early-stage cms. the co-expression network includes four subnetworks (n1, n2, n3, and n4), and representative go terms of subnetworks are shown at right. (g) immunoﬂuorescence for col3a1 and tnnt2 in 7w cms (7w-la) and 22w left atrial cms (22w-la) (left), and 7w (7w-lv) and 22w left cms-v (22w-lv) (right). scale bars, 50 mm.']. Reference sentences:[expression levels of representative genes in cms-a and cms-v with developmental time in three clusters are shown in figure 3d.it has been shown that keratins 8 and 18 are detected only in the human fetal stage (kuruc and franke 1988) and we also found that the expression of krt8 (keratin 8) and krt18 (keratin 18) was specific for early cms and gradually decreased over time (figure 3d).immuno- staining of col3a1 (encoding collagen iii an ecm protein) in 7w and 22w hearts showed that cms at the late stage expressed more collagens than those in early-stage cms (figure 3g) sug- gesting a growing role for ecm in heart development.dynamic changes in extracellular matrix genes in cms and cardiac fibroblasts in the early- and late-stage cm co-expression network of tfs and associated target genes 12 (figure 3f subnetwork n3) and 57 (figure s3h subnetwork n3) respectively were enriched in the ecm-associated subnetwork (figures 3f and s3h).]
Summary: Temporal gene expression trajectories in cardiomyocytes, showing dynamic changes in gene groups and co-expression networks related to developmental time and extracellular matrix genes.

Text 113
10.1016/j.molcel.2019.01.042
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 2. bifurcation of the osk trajectory (a) the force-directed graph of 912 cells pre-processed with sot. each dot is a single cell with colors corresponding to sampling time. fr, force-directed layout algorithm by fruchterman and reingold (left panel). the bifurcating branches defined as nr and rp separately (middle panel) and the ordering of d1–d8 cells along pseudotime (right panel). the sequential color indicates the position of each cell in pseudotime starts from 0 to 1. the pseudotime and branch associations were inferred based on the top diffusion components using wishbone algorithm. nr, non-reprogramming. rp, reprogramming potential. (b) identification of the differentially expressed genes between nr and rp branches using beta-poisson model for single-cell rna-seq data analyses (bpsc) (vu et al., 2016) with adjusted p value < 0.01 and lfc > 0.5. z score of log2(expression + 1) was shown. see table s2 for more details. (c) expression kinetics of selected maker genes along pseudotime. (d) validation scheme for bifurcated cells. cd34 ± cells were separated by facs at post-infection d3 and replated for further reprogramming. (e) results from figure 2d showing, after replanting, the emergency of oct4-gfp-positive colonies at post-infection d7, n = 3, technical replicates, data are represented as mean ± sd. p < 0.001, two-tailed, unpaired student’s t test. see also figures s2 and s3 and table s2.']. Reference sentences:[as shown in figure 2e when we scored oct4-gfp-positive colonies at d7 we show that the cd34+ cells are ten times less efficient than the cd34= ones to give rise to gfp+ ipscs indicating that cd34 marks cells for non-reprogramming fate.although cd34 only marks a fraction of the nr branch shown in figure 2a these results suggest that cells in the nr branch have been driven into a stable non-reprogramming fate.this combined strategy identifies two potential tf families and three timepoints mef day0 day1 day2 day3 day5 day7 day8 ipsc esc cd34+ cd34- day 3 facs function test e oct4-gfp positive colonies cd34+ cd34- 0 100 200 300 400 500 d -0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.7 0.9 0.6 0.8 1.0 pseudotime normalized expression gene expression trend rp nr sall4 dppa5a klk10 cd34 fr 1 fr 2 rp branch nr branch fr 1 fr 2 0 0.5 1 pseudotime fr 1 fr 2 sot (single-cell orientation tracing) branch nr rp −1 0 1 2 z-score a b c dppa5a nr5a2 nanog esrrb epcam sall4 etv5 cd59a morc1 tet2 dnmt3b tet1 nt5e cd34 psca krt14 klk8 lypd2 krt6a fxyd5 cd44 klk10 s100a4 figure 2.nr cells express keratins such as krt6a and krt14 (figure 2b).]
The bifurcation of cell fate trajectories based on gene expression patterns, with distinct non-reprogramming and reprogramming branches identified.

Text 114
10.1016/j.molcel.2019.01.042
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 6. dissecting diverse reprogramming trajectories using 103 genomics single-cell rna-seq (a) uniform manifold approximation and projection (umap) analysis of 59,141 single cells of osk reprogramming process. cells are colored by sampling time. (b) subtle branches structure of d3–d8 cells visualized by fr layout. (c) mapping the topology 103 osk reprogramming. the cells were clustering using louvain algorithm, and the relationship of clusters was measured using partition-based graph abstraction (paga) algorithm. (d) the mean expression of representative genes in each cluster was showed in paga layout. (e) main clusters identified by louvain clustering algorithm. (f) heatmap shows the top 100 signature genes of reprogramming progenitor, non-reprogramming, neuro-like and reprogramming potential states separately. bimod test as implanted in r package seurat (see table s5 for more details). see also figure s7 and table s5.']. Reference sentences:[projection of these data with umap (mclnnes et al. 2018) showed that the data structure is similar to that from the c1 system with mef/d0/d1 cells well separated from each other and d3–d7 cells quite mixed together (figure 6a).we constructed a cell-fate transition network through paga (wolf et al. 2017) based on figure 6b and defined that there are at least three endpoints for cell types (figures 6c and 6d).]
Identification of diverse reprogramming trajectories based on cell clustering and gene expression patterns in single-cell RNA-seq data.

Text 115
10.1084/jem.20181444
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 3. single-cell rna-seq elucidates a developmental trajectory through β-selection. single-cell rna-seq of dn2, dn3, and dn4 cells, performed as described in the materials and methods. (a and b) pca based on the 500 most variable genes across all cells. the colors represent cells from the different populations (a) or the different clusters (b). contour lines indicate the density of the dn2, dn3, and dn4 cells in the pca space. (c) relative frequency of dn2, dn3, and dn4 cells within the different clusters. (d) heat map displaying the centered and scaled expression across the 18,128 cells of the top cluster-specific genes (resulting from the union of the top 23 differentially expressed genes from each pairwise comparison between clusters). the color gradient illustrates the normalized log-count values centered and scaled across all samples for each gene. colors at the top indicate the membership of cells to the different clusters. font colors indicate genes involved in recombination and pre-tcr (green), cell cycle/division and dna replication (blue), and negative regulation of apoptosis (red). (e) expression of duxbl shown in the pca space. size and color intensity of the dots indicate relative expression level of duxbl in each cell, and the colors correspond to the respective population (left) or cluster (right). (f) bar plot showing the average normalized log-counts of duxbl across all cells from each cluster.']. Reference sentences:[pca clearly separated the individual cells of the dn2 population from the other populations on the second principal component (fig 3 a).clustering analysis resulted in seven clusters with two clusters composed of dn2 cells two clusters composed of dn3 cells two clusters composed of both dn3 and dn4 cells and one cluster composed of dn4 cells (fig 3 b and c; and fig s3 a).this is confirmed by iso- lating from the data the top genes that are the best at dis- criminating the seven different clusters: recombination- and pre-tcr signaling–related genes are highly expressed in clusters 3 and 4 while their expression is lower in clusters 5 and 6 (fig 3 d genes in green).confirming our previous results duxbl expression was al- most exclusively detected in the clusters consisting of dn3 cells with maximal expression in cluster 4 (fig 3 e and f) whose cells have an expression profile that is the farthest from cells that have passed β-selection (clusters 5 and 6; fig 3 b and s3 a).indeed single-cell rna-seq of dn2 dn3 and dn4 cells unveiled four different clusters in dn3 thymocytes of which two were shared with dn4 cells (fig 3 a–c; and fig s3 a).interestingly duxbl expression was mainly detected in cluster 4 which is transcriptionally farthest from the dn4 clusters (fig 3 e and f).the increased dn and decreased dp stages in the thymus of these mice showed arrest of t cell de- velopment after the dn3 stage (fig 3).dn3-4 cells of duxblindxptαcre mice stain positive for a functionally re- arranged β-chain (fig 3 f).thus these cells receive a survival and proliferation signal from the pre-tcr and at the same time express duxbl which is inhibiting their cell cycle and induces apoptosis (fig 3 g and 4 a–c).]
Summary: Trajectory of developmental stages revealed by gene expression patterns in single cells.

Text 116
10.1038/s41586-019-0933-9
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 6a). although some key phenotypic and molecular distinctions between primitive and yolk-sac-definitive haematopoiesis are known, the respective in vivo progenitor cells are poorly understood owing to limiting cell numbers and lack of markers. to characterize these processes in more depth, we computationally isolated and re-clustered cells assigned to the erythroid, haemato-endothelial, blood progenitor, endothelial, and mixed mesoderm groups (15,875 cells; fig 3a, b; extended data fig 6b). this analysis highlighted a putative trajectory towards the primitive erythroid lineage, passing through the sub-clusters haemato-endothelial progenitors 1 and 2 (haem 1 and haem 2), blood progenitors 1 and 2 (bp1 and bp2), and erythroid 1–4 (ery 1–ery 4) (fig 3a, b). this trajectory did not include the endothelial region (sub-clusters ec1–ec8), which was enriched for cells collected at e8.25–e8.5, displayed a complex structure, and expressed high levels of kdr, which encodes the protein flk1 (hereafter, we term this the kdrhi region (fig 3c)). notably, some of these endothelial cells expressed haematopoietic markers, such as spi1 (also known as pu.1) and itga2b (fig 3d), potentially highlighting the emergence of blood from endothelium during the second wave20. the incorporation of temporal information (fig 3b) suggested that, unlike the second haematopoietic wave, the first wave does not transit through a molecular state with classical']. Reference sentences:[]
Summary: Identification of a potential trajectory towards primitive erythroid lineage through specific cell clusters, excluding endothelial region, with temporal information.

Text 117
10.1038/s41586-019-0969-x
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 4 | characterization of ten major developmental trajectories present during mouse organogenesis. a, umap 3d visualization of our overall dataset. left, views from one direction; bottom: zoomed view of neural tube–notochord (top) and mesenchymal (bottom) trajectories, coloured by development stage. b, heat map showing the proportion of cells from each of the 38 major cell types (rows) assigned to each of the 10 major trajectories (columns, colour key in a, left). c, umap 3d visualization of epithelial subtrajectories coloured by development stage (colour key in a, right).']. Reference sentences:[notably our sensitivity to detect cell types and subtypes in this study was dependent on the large number of cells profiled (extended data fig 4a–d).the 655 subtypes consist of a median of 1869 cells and range from 51 (a subtype of notochord) to 65894 (a subtype of connective tissue progenitors) cells (extended data fig 4e–g).we annotated 13% of subtypes as likely artefacts (more than 10% of cells in these subtypes are predicted doublets; extended data fig 4h).for the remaining 572 subtypes we identified a median of 20 subtype-specific markers (more than twofold expression difference between first- and second-ranked cell subtypes of the corresponding major cell type; extended data fig 4i j).furthermore most subtypes can be distinguished from all 571 other non-doublet subtypes on the basis of marker gene sets and larger-than-fourfold expression differ- ences (63% with 2 markers 95% with 4 markers; extended data fig 4k supplementary table 5 methods).nearly all of the 38 major cell types fall almost exclusively in 1 of the 10 resulting trajectories (fig 4a b extended data fig 8a b).the haematopoietic trajectory includes megakaryocytes erythrocytes and white blood cells whereas the remaining four trajectories (endothe- lial epithelial hepatic and lens) each correspond to a single major cell type (fig 4b).similarly early mesenchymal cells radiate from a defined region into myocytes limb mesenchyme chondrocytes or osteoblasts and connective tissues (fig 4a bottom right).for example the epithelial trajec- tory breaks into several discontinuous subtrajectories each emanating from a focal concentration of e9.5-derived cells and projecting in one or more directions through cells corresponding to progressively later time points (fig 4c extended data fig 8d).charts are coloured by subtrajectory name (main plots) or developmental stage (insets colours as in fig 4c).we merged 2 groups corresponding to sensory neurons (12 and 3) and another 2 groups corresponding to blood cells (6 and 7) as each pair was closely located in umap space upon visual inspection yielding the 10 supergroups shown in a similar heat map in fig 4b.b same as fig 4a but with colours corresponding to the 38 major cell clusters.d umap 3d visualization of epithelial subtrajectories (as in fig 4c) coloured as per the epithelial subtypes shown in fig 3a.]
Summary: Identification of ten major developmental trajectories in single-cell data, each corresponding to specific cell types or subtypes, visualized through 3D UMAP and heat maps.

Text 118
10.1038/s41586-019-0969-x
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 5 | umap visualization of individual major trajectories. after removing doublet-annotated cells and subclusters, we iteratively reanalysed each of the ten major trajectories. charts are coloured by subtrajectory name (main plots) or developmental stage (insets, colours as in fig 4c). edges in the principal graphs that define trajectories reported by monocle 3 are shown as light blue line segments. pns, peripheral nervous system.']. Reference sentences:[with a new inter-study cross-matching method we matched 96 mca cell types to 58 moca subtypes (extended data fig 5a–c supplementary table 5 methods).nonetheless the atlases unquestionably inform one another as the anatomical resolution of the mca is useful for localizing moca subtypes whereas the developmental focus of moca informs the embryonic origin of mca cell types (extended data fig 5b).a similar analysis matched 48 cell types annotated in a recent mouse brain atlas (bca)32 to 68 moca subtypes with high specificity (extended data fig 5d).after removing 12% of cells corresponding to doublet-annotated cells and/or subclusters we iteratively reanalysed the 10 major trajec- tories (fig 5 extended data fig 9).the resulting 56 developmental subtrajectories span all major systems including the central nervous system peripheral nervous system respiratory digestive cardiovas- cular immune lymphatic urinary endocrine integumentary skeletal muscular and reproductive systems (fig 5 extended data fig 10).we combine the two values by β = 2(βab + 0.01)(βba + 0.01) and find that β reflects the matching of cell types between two datasets with high specificity (extended data fig 5a).article research extended data fig 5 | cell-type correlation analysis between single- cell mouse atlases.the 10 major cell trajectories are visualized with umap (as in fig 5) but coloured: as per the 38 major cell clusters (top left) subcluster id (top right) developmental stage (bottom left) and pseudotime (bottom right).]
Summary: Visualization of major trajectories in single-cell data after removing doublets, showing developmental stages and subtrajectory names.

Text 119
10.1038/s41586-019-0969-x
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 1 | sci-rna-seq3 enables profiling of 2,072,011 cells from 61 mouse embryos across 5 developmental stages in a single experiment. a, sci-rna-seq3 workflow and experimental scheme. user, uracilspecific excision reagent. b, bar plot showing number of cells profiled from each of 61 mouse embryos. c, pseudotime trajectory of pseudobulk rnaseq profiles of mouse embryos.']. Reference sentences:[to increase the throughput we explored more than 1000 experimental condi- tions (extended data fig 1a b methods).the resulting sci-rna- seq3 library was sequenced in a single illumina novaseq run yielding 11 billion reads (fig 1a extended data fig 1c d).transcriptomes from human or mouse control wells were overwhelmingly species-coherent (3% collisions) with performance similar to previous experiments17 (extended data fig 1e–i).we profiled a median of 35272 cells per embryo (fig 1b extended data fig 1j).despite shallow sequencing (about 5000 raw reads per cell; 46% duplicate rate) we recovered a median of 671 umis (519 genes) per cell (extended data fig 1k).later-stage embryos exhibited somewhat reduced umi counts possibly reflecting decreasing nuclear mrna content (extended data fig 1l).we used scrublet22 to detect 4.3% likely doublet cells corresponding to a doublet estimate of 10.3% including both within-cluster and between-cluster doublets (extended data fig 1m n).embryos were readily identifiable as male (n = 31) or female (n = 30) (extended data fig 1o p).applying t-distributed stochastic neighbour embedding (t-sne) to ‘pseudobulk’ profiles (aggregating the transcrip- tomes of the cells of each embryo) resulted in five tightly clustered groups corresponding to developmental stages (extended data fig 1q).we also ordered the mouse embryos along a pseudotime trajectory23 (fig 1c).two prominent gaps (e9.5–e10.5 and e11.5–e12.5) suggest particularly marked changes during these windows (extended data fig 1r s).the resulting 56 developmental subtrajectories span all major systems including the central nervous system peripheral nervous system respiratory digestive cardiovas- cular immune lymphatic urinary endocrine integumentary skeletal muscular and reproductive systems (fig 5 extended data fig 10).to orient sub- trajectories we identified one or several starting points as focal concen- trations of e9.5 cells and then computed developmental pseudotime for cells present along various paths (extended data fig 11 methods).the cells on the myf5+ path largely from early time points also expressed higher levels of genes in the robo–slit signalling pathway which has been implicated in driving ‘pioneer myoblasts’ to form embryonic myofibres47 (extended data fig 12).globally we detected 2908 genes expressed in a trajectory-dependent manner (fdr less than 0.05 and moran’s i greater than 0.01) that grouped into 14 distinct patterns (extended data fig 12 supplementary table 10).article research extended data fig 1 | see next page for caption.article research extended data fig 1 | performance and quality-control-related analyses for sci-rna-seq3.r pseudotime trajectory of pseudobulk rna-seq profiles of mouse embryos (embryo number n = 61); identical to fig 1c but coloured by pseudotime.article research extended data fig 10 | umap visualization of the 56 subtrajectories coloured by development stage.article research extended data fig 11 | umap visualization of the 56 subtrajectories coloured by inferred pseudotime.to orient each subtrajectory (same projections as extended data fig 10) we identified one or several starting points as focal concentrations of e9.5 cells and then computed developmental pseudotime for cells present along various paths.article research extended data fig 12 | see next page for caption.article research extended data fig 12 | gene dynamics in the myogenic trajectory.]
Summary: Trajectory patterns of mouse embryos across developmental stages, identified by pseudotime analysis, reveal distinct gene expression changes.

Text 120
10.1038/s41586-019-0969-x
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 6 | resolving cellular trajectories in myogenesis. edges in the principal graphs that define trajectories reported by monocle 3 are shown as light blue line segments. a, cells putatively involved in myogenesis were isolated from the mesenchymal cell trajectory in silico and then used to construct a myocyte subtrajectory. principal graph nodes that are more than 50% occupied by cells from cluster 13 were taken as ‘seed nodes’, and then cells on any nodes within 20 edges of these seed nodes were selected for subtrajectory analysis. cells in the myocyte subtrajectory (left), coloured by developmental stage (right). b, cells in the myocyte trajectory, coloured by their expression of selected transcriptional regulators of myogenesis. cells with no detectable expression for a given gene are omitted from its plot. values are log-transformed, standardized umi counts. c, cells classified by developmental stage according to the markers shown in c (dermomyotome: pax3+, pax7−; muscle progenitors: pax7+; myoblasts: myf5+ or myod+ and myog−; myocytes: myog+; myotubes: myh3+).']. Reference sentences:[characterization of the apical ectodermal ridge we annotated all subtypes of epithelium and endothelium (clusters 6 and 20 respectively; fig 3a extended data fig 6a–c supplementary table 2).we performed pseudotemporal ordering of aer cells yielding a simple early-to-late trajectory and 710 differen- tially expressed genes (5% fdr; fig 3g h extended data fig 6d supplementary table 6).pathway-level analyses also showed the downregulation of proliferative programs in this window (extended data fig 6e f).to test this we isolated myocytes and their putative ‘ancestral’ cells from the mesenchyme trajectory in silico (fig 6a methods).next we used monocle 3 to construct a myogenesis-specific trajectory which featured multiple focal concentrations of e9.5 cells with cells from later stages distributed over several paths radiating outward (fig 6a).pax3 and pax7 which mark skeletal muscle progenitors were expressed over a broad area of the principal graph (fig 6b).overall the trajectory is consistent with the view that different mesodermal lineages use distinct factors to converge on a core program of muscle genes (fig 6c).article research extended data fig 6 | analysis of mouse epithelium endothelium and limb-aer cells.a genes that are differentially expressed between the myf5 path and the myod path highlighted in fig 6.]
Summary: Identification of myogenesis trajectory using single-cell data, highlighting developmental stages and transcriptional regulators.

Text 121
10.1038/s41586-019-0969-x
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 3 | identification and characterization of epithelial cell subtypes and the limb aer. a, t-sne visualization and marker-based annotation of epithelial cell subtypes (74,651 cells). b, t-sne visualization of all epithelial cells coloured by expression level of fgf8. ‘high’ indicates cells with umi count for fgf8 greater than 1. c, in situ hybridization images of fgf8 in embryos from e9.5 to e13.5. arrow, site of gene expression. n = 5. d, e, t-sne visualization of all epithelial cells coloured by expression level (d) and whole-embryo in situ hybridization images (e) for fndc3a (top), adamts3 (middle) and snap91 (bottom). n = 5. ‘high’ indicates cells with umi count for fndc3a >3, for adamts3 >1 and for snap91 >1. arrow, site of gene expression. f, line plot showing the estimated relative cell numbers for epithelial cells and aer cells, calculated as in extended data fig 2l. data points for individual embryos were ordered by development pseudotime and smoothed by the locally estimated scatterplot smoothing (loess) method. g, pseudotime trajectory of aer single-cell transcriptomes (cell number, n = 1,237), coloured by development stage. h, kinetics plot showing relative expression of aer marker genes across developmental pseudotime.']. Reference sentences:[after subclusters dominated by a few embryos were removed and highly similar subclus- ters were merged (methods) 655 subclusters were identified (extended data fig 3).characterization of the apical ectodermal ridge we annotated all subtypes of epithelium and endothelium (clusters 6 and 20 respectively; fig 3a extended data fig 6a–c supplementary table 2).wish of fgf8 (known) fndc3a adamts3 and snap91 (all novel) confirmed expression specific to the most distal tip of the limb bud representing the aer at e10.5 or e11.5 (fig 3b–e).although detected at all time points and nearly all embryos the estimated number of aer cells per embryo peaked between e10.5 and e11.5 (fig 3f) consistent with a previous report38 and our val- idations (fig 3c).we performed pseudotemporal ordering of aer cells yielding a simple early-to-late trajectory and 710 differen- tially expressed genes (5% fdr; fig 3g h extended data fig 6d supplementary table 6).article research extended data fig 3 | louvain clustering and t-sne visualization of subclusters of the each of 38 major cell types.doublet-derived subclusters (2/29 epithelial subtypes and 5/16 endothelial subtypes) are excluded from these plots but are shown in fig 3a and in c respectively.d umap 3d visualization of epithelial subtrajectories (as in fig 4c) coloured as per the epithelial subtypes shown in fig 3a.]
Summary: Trajectory patterns of epithelial cell subtypes and apical ectodermal ridge cells across developmental pseudotime, with marker gene expression dynamics.

Text 122
10.1038/s41586-019-0942-8
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 4 | scrna-seq analysis of insulin-producing human α-cells. a, t-sne visualization of single-cell transcriptomes of pseudoislets; 47 αgfp, 434 αpm and 51 βgfp cells form three distinct clusters. b, in silico pseudotime ordering of αpm cells (n = 434) shows three different states along a main pseudotemporal trajectory: ‘early’ (135 cells), ‘mid’ (213 cells) and ‘late’ (86 cells). each dot represents one cell. most αpm cells allocate along the main path from early to late based on reprogramming progression. c, clustering of differentially modulated genes by pseudotime progression of αpm cells shows distinct kinetics of gene responses to cell conversion: increase in expression of β-cell genes (‘pro-conversion’ genes) and increase in expression of α-cell genes (‘resistant’ genes). only α- and β-related genes are shown. d, dot plot showing gene signature shifts among different pseudotime stages. e, gene expression kinetics along pseudotime progression of representative genes. f, superimposition of pseudotime categories on the t-sne map reveals an early-to-late transition of αpm cells.']. Reference sentences:[insulin secretion by transduced human γ-cells we observed that ppy-producing γ-cells transduced with pdx1 and mafa engage in insulin production as efficiently as α-cells while maintaining ppy expression (extended data fig 4a–d).hm cells accelerated reaggregation yet decreased reprogramming frequency (extended data fig 4e–g).γpm pseudoislets secreted insulin after glucose stimulation even better than α-cells (fig 1f; extended data fig 4h).diabetes remission by insulin-secreting α-cells pseudoislets maintained in culture lose cells steadily yet levels of insulin mrna increase (extended data fig 4i j).three distinct αgfp αpm and βgfp cell populations were dis- covered using t-distributed stochastic neighbour embedding (t-sne) visualization (fig 4a).we found one main path with few minor branches enabling the allocation of three pseudotime-dependent pro- gression states for αpm cells: early mid and late (fig 4b; extended data fig 9c d).β-cell-related genes were upregulated in late cells (ins uchl1 and pcsk1; fig 4c–e) whereas many α-cell-related genes were down- regulated (gcg and tm4sf4).some α/β-cell-related genes were not modulated after pseudotime progression (arx; extended data fig 9g) whereas others changed in the opposite direction (nr4a2; fig 4c).when superimposing pseudotime categories on cells in t-sne mapping we found a pseudotemporal transition along the α-to-β-cell progression (fig 4f).article research extended data fig 4 | see next page for caption.article research extended data fig 4 | γ-cell reprogramming and in vitro kinetics of cell number and gene expression levels in pseudoislets.b gcg and ins expression on t-sne of single-cell transcriptomes from αgfp (n = 47) αpm (n = 434) and βgfp cells (n = 51) from pseudoislets cultured for 1 week (related to fig 4a).c cell clustering of αpm cells (n = 434) based on the state along pseudotime trajectory (related to fig 4b) showing ten different states.d ins and gcg expression on pseudotime trajectory of αpm cells (related to fig 4b).e cell distributions of pseudotime-based early mid and late αpm cells on the t-sne map (related to fig 4f).f kinetics of gene expression along pseudotime progression in αpm cells (n = 434) (related to fig 4e).]
Summary: Trajectory analysis reveals pseudotime-dependent gene expression changes in αpm cells, transitioning from early to late states with distinct kinetics of α- and β-cell gene expressions.

Text 123
10.1016/j.immuni.2019.02.007
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 5. microglia that occupy the srs in photoreceptor degeneration undergo transcriptional reprograming (a) trajectory analysis suggests transition of different microglia subtypes (left) along pseudotime (right). pseudotime of mg0 cluster is set as 0. top 1,000 variably expressed genes from clustering analysis are used. (b) violin plots depict expression changes of marker genes across clusters as indicated. (c) representative images show gal3+ (red) srmg in ld (top: yfp, green) and rhop23h (bottom: iba1, green). images were acquired in 3 independent experiments from 6 and 4 mice, respectively. see table s2 for details. scale bars, 100 mm. (d) heatmap illustrates dynamic transition from mg0 to smg3 along pseudotime: top, downregulated genes; bottom, upregulated genes. genes are clustered and ordered based on expression profile. values beyond the scale range are set to minimum or maximum. (e) bar graphs show top-ranked pathways by fold enrichment and significance (àlog10 scale) from gene ontology (go)-term pathway enrichment analysis. top, downregulated genes (blue); bottom, upregulated (red). top 100 downregulated and 100 upregulated genes in between smg3 and mg0 are used for the analysis. see also figure s5 and table s2.']. Reference sentences:[the top 100 up- regulated genes from mg0 (i.e. steady state) and smg3 (i.e. srmg) clusters were plotted over pseudotime (figure 5d).we also performed a gene ontology enrichment analysis of the top altered genes in smg3 relative to mg0 and found that down-regulated genes included immune-response pathways whereas enriched genes included cell recognition and adhesion pathways (figure 5e).moreover enriched pathways such as lipid metabolism and antioxidant pathway genes in smg3 (figure 5e) may point to the possibility that srmg are protective in this setting.]
Summary: Trajectory analysis reveals transitions of cell subtypes over pseudotime, with dynamic gene expression changes and enriched pathways related to cell function.

Text 124
10.1016/j.celrep.2019.02.031
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 3. inference of a spatial trajectory in the epi and pluripotency properties of clusters (a) 3d diffusion map showing three clusters (anterior, transition, and posterior) of epi cells identified by k-means clustering (k = 3). (b) diffusion map showing the distribution of cells of anterior, transition, and posterior state (marked by symbols) by embryonic age (color legend). (c) the fraction of cells of anterior, transition, and posterior state in embryos at each embryonic age. (d) developmental trajectory in the pseudospace assigned to each cell by fitting a principal curve to the cells in the two-dimensional diffusion map subspace. (e) groups of genes and specific examples (fgf4, magel2, and mesp1) displaying distinct dynamic expression patterns (i–iii) along the pseudospace axis in epi cells.']. Reference sentences:[in addition genes of pattern ii (e.g. magel2) increased expression in the transition cluster but decreased in anterior and posterior clusters (figure 3e; table s3).among these three epi states the transition epi cells displayed a greater de- gree of cell-cell variability than anterior and posterior epi cells in the context of pairwise cell-cell distance (figure 3f).by principal-component analysis (pca) we showed that anterior epi cells were posi- tioned in the proximity of the escs the posterior epi cells were close to the episcs and the transition cells intercalated be- tween the anterior and posterior cells along the pc1 coordinate (figure 3g inset showing the principal curve fitted to the all cells for a refined resolution of cell positioning).the anterior epi cells showed diminish- ing correlation whereas the posterior epi cluster showed increasing correlation with the series of esc-epilcs-episcs (figure 3h).interestingly transition epi cells displayed a similar level of correlation to cells of different pluripotency states in vitro (figure 3h).moreover epi cells upregulated the markers char- acteristic of the primed pluripotency (e.g. otx2 fgf5 and sox4) and a subset of markers of epilcs and episcs (figure 3i).establishing posterior cell identity by a transitional phase the fraction of transition epi increased with time and together with posterior epi constituted the majority of epi cells at e6.5 (figure 3c).venn diagram showed how degs evolved with a large difference found at e5.5 (1902 degs) and e6.25 (1204 degs) (figure 4a; table s4) which suggested that transition epi was preparing for cell cell reports 26 2593–2607 march 5 2019 2597 a e g h f b c d i figure 3.based on the preponderance of three epi states in total e6.5 cells (figure 3c) geo-seq data of e6.5 3a–7a regions were used to validate the anterior genes and e6.5 2a–5p regions were used to validate the transition genes (figure 4e corn plots).association between xci progression and pluripotency to relate the xci status with the epi states we used the principal curve generated in figure 3d and mapped the xci status to each female cell included in the xci analysis.(e) mapping of the allele-informative (c57/cast hybrid) female epi cells to the principal curve (as in figure 3d) by xci states (color coded) and embryonic time points (symbols).]
Summary: Trajectory analysis reveals dynamic gene expression patterns along a developmental pseudospace axis in epi cells, transitioning between anterior and posterior states.

Text 125
10.1016/j.celrep.2019.02.031
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 4. spatially defined molecular features and gene expression in the epi (a) the venn diagram showing the degs between the anterior and transition epi states at four embryonic ages. (b) display of the pattern of degs between the anterior and posterior states along the spatial trajectory. the transition state epi cells expressed both the anterior and posterior degs at comparable levels. (c) the expression levels (dot size) and expression variability (extra-poisson variability) (color scale) of the top 10 degs in epi cells of anterior and posterior states. (d) heatmap showing the expression of top 20 degs in the anterior, transition and posterior states, respectively. genes are ordered by fold changes and expression levels are normalized by z-score. (e) the mapping of each epi state by degs to the equivalent populations in the epiblast, displayed as the corn plot by geo-seq. corn plots: color scale indicates the level of gene expression computed from transcript counts in the rna-seq dataset. boxes in the corn plots indicate the partition of the epi into three regions. graphical data: pearson correlation coefficient of gene expression between degs in three epi clusters with the corresponding regions computed with geo-seq. see also figures s3 and s4 and tables s4, s5, s6, and s7.']. Reference sentences:[venn diagram showed how degs evolved with a large difference found at e5.5 (1902 degs) and e6.25 (1204 degs) (figure 4a; table s4) which suggested that transition epi was preparing for cell cell reports 26 2593–2607 march 5 2019 2597 a e g h f b c d i figure 3.we showed that anterior marker genes were gradually downregulated whereas posterior marker genes were upregulated along the pseudospace trajec- tory (figure 4b).more importantly transition epi showed rela- tively similar expression of these markers but switched from slightly higher expression of anterior marker to posterior marker at one spatial point (figure 4b).for the top 10 anterior and poste- rior markers among three epi states the transition cells showed a weak but comparable level of expression of these 20 markers with higher variability indicating the fate switching (figure 4c).2017) and the remodeling of the extra- cellular matrix and regulation of g1-s cell-cycle transition in esc differentiation such as spp1 and dppa2 (du et al. 2010; kalkan et al. 2017) were enriched in the anterior state (figure 4d).because the posterior state was represented mainly among epi cells of e6.5 embryos (figures 3b and 3c) we validated the positional profile of gene expression with geo-seq data of e6.5 epi (figure 4e; table s7).based on the preponderance of three epi states in total e6.5 cells (figure 3c) geo-seq data of e6.5 3a–7a regions were used to validate the anterior genes and e6.5 2a–5p regions were used to validate the transition genes (figure 4e corn plots).top-ranked genes in the anterior (aire and fam25c) and the posterior state (klhl6 and aplnr) were mapped to cells in the anterior and the posterior regions of the e6.5 epiblast respectively whereas those of the transition marker (trh and ntrk2) were mapped to populations in between the anterior and posterior regions (corn plots figure 4e).cell reports 26 2593–2607 march 5 2019 2599 a d e b c figure 4.]
Summary: Trajectory patterns of gene expression changes along spatial states in single cells, with transition cells showing intermediate expression levels.

Text 126
10.1681/ASN.2018090896
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 5. pseudotime analysis of gene expression show dynamic changes in endothelial and mesangial cells in diabetic mice. (a and b) cell trajectories of (a) gecs and (b) mesangial cells. each point corresponds to a cell and its location indicates the cell’s stage in control-to-dm transition. cells from the control sample are colored in blue; cells from the dm samples are colored in red; trajectory curve is colored in gray. (c and d) heatmap of top 1000 genes that are significantly changed in control-to-dm transition in pseudotime in (c) endothelial and (d) mesangial cells. each row represents a gene, where the left end corresponds to the transition starting point (control) and the right end corresponds to transition ending point (dm). color scheme represents the z-score distribution from 23.0 (blue) to 3.0 (red). genes that covary across transition are clustered into six blocks.']. Reference sentences:[the top 15 principal components were chosen for cell clustering and t-sne projection because no significant changes were observed beyond 15 principal components as shown in supplemental figure 5. t-sne dimensional reduc- tion was performed using runtsne function and cells were clustered using findclusters function with resolution=0.7.single cells from the two sets of experiments clustered similarly (supplemental figure 5) and further downstream ex- pression analysis was performed by combining the data from the two experiments.figure 5 a and b shows the pattern of trajectory for endothelial and mesangial cells respectively and the heat- maps in figure 5 c and d illustrate the top 1000 genes in six different clusters whose expression was significantly changed in pseudotime (a complete list of genes in each cluster is provided in the supplemental material).component 1 component 2 0 2 4 6 b 0 5 control diabetic component 1 -5.0 -4 -2 component 2 0 a 5.0 control diabetic -2.5 2.5 0.0 d expression z-score diabetic pseudotime control -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 1 2 3 4 5 6 c expression z-score diabetic pseudotime control -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 1 2 3 4 5 6 figure 5.supplemental figure 5.]
Dynamic changes in cell trajectories during control-to-dm transition, with genes clustered into six blocks based on pseudotime expression patterns.

Text 127
10.1016/j.celrep.2019.02.043
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 4. a sensitive repact algorithm to identify t2d or obesity signature genes in b cells (a) schematic demonstrating how repact may improve the sensitivity identifying disease relevant genes with small sample size. (b) all b cells are plotted in the 3d space of the top 3 principle components. left: cells are colored based on the bmi of donor. right: cells were colored based on whether the donor was a t2d patient. (c) left: comparison of the bmi index values of cells from each donor; the color of the violin plots represents the actual bmi of each donor. right: comparison of the t2d index distribution of each donor. the color of the plots represents the t2d status of the donors. vertical dash lines demonstrate how cells are binned into pseudostates. (d) heatmaps demonstrating the top obesity trajectory genes (left) and t2d trajectory genes (right). each row in the heatmaps represent the transcriptional changes from low-index pseudostates to high-index pseudostates. (e) venn diagram showing the overlap between obesity and t2d signature genes identified from repact analyses. (f) function categories enriched among genes with agreeing or opposite tends.']. Reference sentences:[however these models do not account for cellular heterogeneity and treat all cells from the same donor equally which may result in low sensitivity for the following rea- sons: (1) disease-causing cells can be too rare to be detected when a majority of cells are normal (figure 4a); and (2) the differ- ence between normal and patient cells can be small and masked by large individual variance.theoretically by ranking and directly comparing cells at normal transitional and disease states it is possible to improve the sensitivity even if very few donors are available (figure 4a).figure 4b shows scatterplots of all the b cells in the space of top three principle components (pcs).figure 4b is an example when we only used the top three pcs to plot the trajectory lines.we then binned the cells into a number of pseudo- states according to the index values (figure 4c).repact identifies common and specific b cell gene signatures associated with obesity and t2d we identified 1368 t2d trajectory genes and 1188 obesity tra- jectory genes in b cells (figure 4d; data s4).it is known that obesity increases diabetes risk and as expected the two signa- tures shared many common genes (figure 4e).for example gapdh iapp spp1 and cpe are downregulated in both obesity and t2d trajectories (figure 4d).most interestingly we found many genes specific to one tra- jectory but not the other including genes with opposite trends in the two trajectories (figure 4e).on the contrary two ferritin genes (ftl and fth1) are downregulated in obesity but upregulated in t2d (figure 4d).another interesting observation is that although only 15 obesity-upregulated genes are downregulated in t2d (including ins) many more (99) obesity-downregulated genes shift their trends in to upregulation in t2d (figure 4e).we therefore per- formed a gene set enrichment analysis (gsea) on genes with common or opposite trends in obesity or t2d (figure 4f).for example consistent with the connection to hypoxia in both t2d and bmi (ye 2009) we found upregulation of hypoxia glycolysis and hif1a target genes but downregulation of aer- obic respiration pathways in both trajectories (figure 4f).sur- prisingly the proteasome genes or pathway are elevated in t2d but downregulated in obesity trajectory (figure 4f).to address this problem we decided to perform an unbiased genome-wide crispr screen a d b c e f figure 4.by doing this repact can discern a continuous disease trajectory that is too subtle to be detected from bulk analysis (figure 4a).]
Summary: Identification of trajectory genes associated with obesity and T2D in B cells, revealing common and specific gene signatures, including genes with opposite trends between the two conditions.

Text 128
10.1016/j.celrep.2019.02.043
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 6. the network of insulin regulators top insulin regulator genes from crispr screen were analyzed by search tool for the retrieval of interacting genes or proteins (string). oval shape, negative insulin regulators; rectangle, positive regulators. the b cell signature genes identified from drop-seq data are highlighted in color: purple, diabetes or obesity trajectory genes; red, b-cell-specific genes. enlarged are the nine subnetworks with signature genes.']. Reference sentences:[integrative analysis of single-cell and crispr data revealed disease-relevant insulin-regulating modules we performed string analysis (szklarczyk et al. 2015) on the 373 tier-one insulin regulators and drew all the functional or physical associations between these genes (figure 6; star methods).compared to drop-seq data we identified 100 insulin regulators up- or downregulated in the diabetes or obesity tra- jectory including cdkn2a cox7c glis3 and xbp1 (figure 6 figure 6.these genes may have important selective functions in b cells (figure 6; data s5).seventeen b-cell-specific insulin regulators also change their expression in diabetes or obesity trajectories (atp6v1h bcat2 cct8 cdkn2a cops6 dhps eif3e gnas ins2 lmo2 mrpl22 nelfcd rph3al rtcb srp9 taf7 and xbp1) (figure 6).our analysis highlighted nine notable modules of insulin regulators; each module contains at least one diabetes or obesity signature genes in b cell and all of them represent multi-protein complexes with cooperative functions (figure 6).consistently another exocytosis inhibitor stxbp5 is also a positive insulin regulator (figure 6).our crispr screen also identified two previously unrecog- nized insulin regulators modules: the cohesin function module and the nua4/tip60 histone acetyltransferase (hat) complex module (figure 6).]
Summary: Identification of insulin regulator modules related to diabetes or obesity trajectories in b cells, highlighting cooperative functions of signature genes in multi-protein complexes.

Text 129
10.1242/dev.174284
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 7. reconstruction of developmental trajectories of the diencephalon. (a) urd-']. Reference sentences:[we assigned apical progenitors (mostly clusters 15 and 16) as the root and postmitotic neurons of clusters 1-5 and 7 as tips resulting a multi-branching trajectory (fig 7a).the hierarchical tree was visualized with a force-directed layout based on cells’ visitation frequency by the random walks from each tip (fig 7b).inspection of the expression of known markers showed progressive changes along consecutive segments of the respective trajectory as expected (fig 7c and fig s7) suggesting that we had successfully reconstructed the developmental trajectory of the diencephalon.for example the urd-inferred tree predicts a close relationship between the rostral thalamus and prethalamus (fig 7a and b).for the cascade genes in each lineage we applied impulse response fitting to determine their temporal dynamics leading to identification of markers specific for each lineage (fig 7a-f and table s2).development • accepted manuscript figure 7.]
Summary: Reconstruction of developmental trajectories in single cells, showing progressive changes in gene expression along branches.

Text 130
10.1242/dev.174177
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 4. clustering and single-cell trajectories of homeostatic, injured muscs, and primary myoblasts']. Reference sentences:[ta and edl muscles of two three-month old c56bl/6j mice were injured with the myotoxic agent notexin and muscs were facs-isolated 60hr after injury (fig 4a and fig s3b).t-sne analysis of injured muscs identified three clusters: muscs 60h cl1 cl2 and cl3 distinct from those of homeostatic muscs (fig 4a figs3gh).translational regulators were enriched in all injured muscs (eif3c eif4ebp1) which had also activated ccdn1transcription (fig 4b fig s3f and table s2).cells located in one of the injured musc clusters expressed myogenin and were enriched for the terms “muscle contraction” and “myotube differentiation” indicating that they had entered differentiation (fig 4b and table s2).as noted in bulk transcriptome analyses of injured or culture-activated muscs (pallafacchina et al. 2010) (liu et al. 2013) (ryall et al. 2015b) (pala et al. 2018) expression of genes involved in oxidation-reduction processes glycolysis tricarboxylic acid (tca) cycle mitochondrial genes serine biosynthesis and pentose phosphate pathways was also enriched in injured muscs (fig 4c fig s3f and table s2).expression of genes known to regulate metabolic pathways and rna metabolism (rplp1 rpl26) was also increased in injured muscs (fig 4b fig s3i).muscs 60h were temporally distinct from homeostatic muscs and extended towards pms (fig 4d figs4a).correct cell ordering was confirmed by plotting genes known to be expressed in the three different cell states (fig 4d).next we generated heatmaps of pseudotemporal expression patterns to comprehensively visualize metabolic pathways in homeostatic muscs 60h and pms (fig 4e figs4b).with the development • accepted manuscript exception of hk2 (pala et al. 2018) glycolysis and pentose phosphate pathways were also activated in injured muscs 60h and pms (fig 4e and table s2).as previously observed expression of a subset of oxidative genes fabp4 pnpla2 acaca lipa acsl1 was elevated in homeostatic muscs and decreased in injured muscs and pms (ryall et al. 2015b) (fig 4e).development • accepted manuscript fig 4.development: doi:10.1242/dev.174177: supplementary information development • accepted manuscript supplemental fig 4 dell’orso et al.]
Summary: Trajectory analysis reveals distinct clusters of cells transitioning from homeostatic to injured states, with enriched expression of genes related to metabolism and differentiation.

Text 131
10.1242/dev.174177
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 3. clustering and pseudotemporal trajectories identify transcriptional dynamics of muscs and primay myoblasts']. Reference sentences:[to directly compare muscs and pms we performed t-sne analysis and computationally merged their corresponding scrna-seq datasets (fig 3a figs2ef).t-sne analysis segregated the transcriptomes corresponding to muscs and pms in five clusters: two belonging to muscs and three to pms (fig 3a figs2gh).analysis of the top 20 genes differentially expressed each of the five clusters are reported in fig 3b.cells present in both pm clusters (pm1 and pm2) expressed transcripts of cyclins ccnd1 and ccnd2 (fig 3c).a cluster of pms containing cells that had activated transcription reflective of differentiation (differentiating myocytes dm) was characterized by myogenin expression (fig 3c).in addition to cell cycle go analysis of the pm clusters revealed an enrichment for development • accepted manuscript terms related to metabolic pathways (oxidative and glycolytic enzymes serine biosynthesis enzymes enzymes of the pentose phosphate pathway) proteostasis (proteome quality and homeostasis) and activation of translation (fig 3d and table s2).cells located in the initial phase of the trajectory (start of pseudotime) correspond to musc cq as indicated by expression of pax7 and the notch target hes1 (fig 3e).pms were identified as a distinct group of cells expressing transcripts involved in cell cycle progression (cyclin e and g1/s checkpoint) chromatin remodeling complexes and regulators of translational initiations (eukaryotic initation factors eifs) (fig 3e and table s2).one trajectory identified cells progressing towards differentiation as indicated by activation of myogenin and muscle structural transcript tnnt2 (troponin t2) (fig 3e).cyclins were down-regulated and cell cycle inhibitors cdkn1a/b upregulated in cells located within this branch (fig 3e dm).another trajectory stemming out of the pm node identified cells which retained transcripts of cyclins ccnd1 and ccnd2 without detectable myogenin expression (fig 3e).development • accepted manuscript fig 3.development: doi:10.1242/dev.174177: supplementary information development • accepted manuscript a b c d 60h post-inj 1 60h post-inj 2 supplemental fig 3 dell’orso et al.]
Summary: Trajectory analysis reveals transcriptional dynamics of differentiating cells, with distinct gene expressions marking progression towards differentiation or cell cycle arrest.

Text 132
10.7554/eLife.43882
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 7. diffusion map analysis of gfp+ cells. (a) 3d diffusion map of main fibroblast/myofibroblast populations with cells colored according to population. (b) 2d diffusion map facetted according to experimental condition. (c) expression of marker genes on main trajectories of diffusion components across conditions. (d) heatmap of differentially expressed genes with representative go biological process terms. doi: https://doi.org/10.7554/elife.43882.030']. Reference sentences:[myo f-wntx and f-cyc were represented as three different trajectories along diffusion components 1 2 and 3 respectively (figure 7a) with the root containing the two large unactivated fibroblast populations f-sh and f-sl which were most promi- nent in sham hearts.f-cyc characterized by expression of a strong cell cycle gene signature was represented most strongly at mi-day 3 whereas myo was exclusively associated with mi-day 7 (figure 7bc).we examined de and go bp terms in f-act f-cyc and myo compared with f-sl and f-sh com- bined across all conditions (figure 7d; supplementary file 5; supplementary file 6).many of these genes were also expressed in f-cyc and myo; however there was an additional large gene signature strongly upregulated in myo com- pared to f-act (figure 7d).]
Summary: Different trajectories of cell populations along diffusion components, with distinct gene expression patterns across experimental conditions.

Text 133
10.7554/eLife.43882
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 9. schematic summary of the flux and pseudotime differentiation dynamics of gfp+ populations between sham, mi-day 3 and mi-day 7. populations are ordered in pseudotime from unactivated (top) to most activated/mature (bottom). arrows connecting populations indicate direction of proposed differentiation/pseudotime trajectory. colored arrows indicate whether the population appears to expand or diminish relative to the previous time-point.']. Reference sentences:[the related f-trans is an intermediary population between f-sl and f-wntx (figure 9).]
Summary: The trajectory of cell differentiation from unactivated to activated/mature populations over pseudotime is shown, with populations expanding or diminishing.

Text 134
10.1038/s41586-019-1104-8
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 5a). consistently, bone marrow immunofluorescence confirmed the co-expression of the o2-associated marker cd9 (encoded by cd9) with tdtomato in the epiphysis (extended data fig 5c). as cluster o3 (bglaphighcar3high) showed the highest expression of col2.3 (col1a1) and osteogenesis-associated genes, it represents mature osteoblasts (cluster shown in olive green in fig 2c, extended data fig 5a). bone marrow immunofluorescence confirmed the co-staining of tdtomato with the biomarker car3 (encoded by car3) (extended data fig 5d). additional smaller clusters were revealed through independent analysis of the col2.3+ subset. notably, in addition to the o1, o2 and o3 subsets, col1a1 was expressed in vascular endothelial (cluster c4), glial (cluster c5) and stromal-like (cluster c6) cells (extended data fig 2h–j). lepr+ bone marrow cells give rise to both osteoblasts and adipocytes11. as t-sne visualization does not maintain the global structure of differentiation dynamics, we reconstructed the developmental trajectory to infer the relationship between lepr+ cells of clusters p1, p2, p3 and p4 and terminally differentiated osteo-populations (fig 2d). pseudotime ordering revealed a transcriptional continuum of lepr+ cellular states, in which known adipogenic and osteogenic markers rise towards the opposite ends of this range (p1 and p2 versus p3 and p4) (fig 2e).']. Reference sentences:[]
Summary: Trajectory analysis reveals a continuum of cellular states from precursor to terminally differentiated cells in single-cell transcriptomics data.

Text 135
10.1038/s41586-019-1104-8
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 2 | expression of pro-haematopoietic factors by the bone marrow microenvironment. a–c, gene signatures of subpopulations of the bone marrow niche based on the average relative expression levels of the ten most-significant markers for each cluster exclusively within the parent-niche subsets (ve-cad+ (a), lepr+(b) or col2.3+(c)) at a steady state. sepp1 is also known as selenop. mast with bonferroni correction. d, reconstructed cell differentiation trajectory of lepr+']. Reference sentences:[we removed 965 contaminating cells—most of which were haematopoietic cells—and used the remaining 17374 cells for the analysis (see methods) (extended data fig 2a).two major clusters were identified within the bone marrow vascu- lature using integrated (fig 1d 2a) as well as independent (extended data fig 2b–d) approaches.clusters p1 (mgphigh) and especially p2 (lplhigh) expressed adipogenesis- associated markers (clusters shown in red and green respectively in fig 2b extended data fig 4a).analysis of the lepr+ population exclusively confirmed the presence of clusters p1 p3 and p4 (extended data fig 2 e–g).clusters p3 (wif1high; brown in fig 2e) and p4 (spp1highibsphigh; pink in fig 2e) represented osteo-primed lepr+ cells as they expressed progressively increasing levels of osteogenesis- associated genes (fig 2e).as cluster o3 (bglaphighcar3high) showed the highest expression of col2.3 (col1a1) and osteogenesis-associated genes it represents mature osteoblasts (cluster shown in olive green in fig 2c extended data fig 5a).notably in addition to the o1 o2 and o3 subsets col1a1 was expressed in vascular endothelial (cluster c4) glial (cluster c5) and stromal-like (cluster c6) cells (extended data fig 2h–j).as t-sne visualization does not maintain the global structure of differentiation dynamics we reconstructed the developmental tra- jectory to infer the relationship between lepr+ cells of clusters p1 p2 p3 and p4 and terminally differentiated osteo-populations (fig 2d).pseudotime ordering revealed a transcriptional continuum of lepr+ cellular states in which known adipogenic and osteogenic markers rise towards the opposite ends of this range (p1 and p2 versus p3 and p4) (fig 2e).pro-haematopoietic factors in the bone marrow niche we next examined the expression patterns of pro-haematopoietic fac- tors18 (fig 2f).notch ligands from vascular endothelial cells our analysis revealed that the notch ligands dll1 and dll4 are specif- ically expressed in the ve-cad+ cells (fig 2f).to reduce the effects of distant niche elements we additionally recalculated cluster markers relative only to other clusters of the same population (fig 2a–c).the ve-cad+ cells were divided into three clusters (extended data fig 2b).three of the remaining clusters were merged owing to their transcriptional sim- ilarity (extended data fig 2e).the col2.3+ cells were divided into six clusters (extended data fig 2h).we selected the top 1000 significantly differentially expressed genes as the ordering genes for the trajectory reconstruction using the nonlinear reconstruction algorithm ddrtree (fig 2d).article research extended data fig 2 | see next page for caption.article research extended data fig 2 | analysis of ve-cad+ lepr+ and col2.3+ populations.]
Summary: Trajectory of lepr+ cells towards osteogenic differentiation, with distinct clusters expressing adipogenic and osteogenic markers.

Text 136
10.1016/j.stem.2019.03.006
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 1. unsupervised ordering of the hgfap-gfp-derived cells reveals developmental hierarchy (a) scheme for analysis of hgfap-gfp+ cells using scrna-seq from neonatal cortices (n = 5 mice). (b) t-sne analysis of hgfap-gfp+ cell clusters. (c) heatmap of hgfap-gfp+ cells ordered as t-sne (n = 815). columns, individual cells; rows, genes. (d) the proportions of distinct clusters among total hgfap-gfp+ cells. (e) dot plot of levels of selected marker genes in subpopulations. (f and g) t-sne plots of (f) astrocyte (astro), radial glia (rg), and igc and (g) marker genes. (h) comparison of astrocyte and igc clusters with adult astrocyte populations. (i and j) t-sne plot of (i) opc and pri-opc cells and (j) marker genes. (k) pseudo-time ordering of pri-opcs and opcs in hgfap-gfp+ dataset. red line, the predicted trajectory. (l) predicted lineage trajectories from rg-like cells in hgfap-gfp+ cells. see also figure s1 and table s2.']. Reference sentences:[we performed droplet-based scrna-seq (macosko et al. 2015) on facs- sorted gfp+ cells from the neonatal cortices of hgfap-gfp animals at p5 and p6 when astrocyte precursors undergo prolif- eration and differentiation (ge et al. 2012; sauvageot and stiles 2002; figure 1a).among hgfap-gfp+ cells 14.6% were astrocytes and 5.4% were radial glia like (figure 1d).a subgroup of igc population but not mature astrocytes that expressed cell-cycle-related genes (e.g. mki67) was defined as cycling igcs (figure 1c).the signature genes are highly cell type specific in distinct glial progenitor cells (figure 1e).the astro- cytes in the neonatal cortex were highly correlated with the adult astrocyte population c (lin et al. 2017; figure 1h).an unsupervised pseudo-time analysis using slingshot (fletcher et al. 2017) was consistent with a developmental tra- jectory from pri-opc to opc (figure 1k) with increased expres- sion of pdgfra over the trajectory and high levels of early lineage genes (e.g. ppp1r14b) in pri-opcs (figure s1c).a recent study based on gfp expression in hgfap-gfp transgenic cortices at p6 suggested that cortical astroglia result figure 1.remarkably among hgfap-gfp+ cells that were prolifer- ative (ki67+) we found that 84.2% were positive for olig2 (fig- ures 2i and 2j) indicating that these dividing cells are likely igcs or opcs rather than differentiated astrocytes consistent with the gene expression profile clustering analysis (figure 1c).]
Developmental trajectory of glial cells from progenitors to mature cell types based on gene expression patterns.

Text 137
10.1038/s41598-019-42578-z
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 1. scrna-seq analysis depicts the developmental processes of neonatal germ cells. (a,b) t-sne plots of single cell transcriptome data from p1.5, p3.5, and p5.5 cell samples. clustering analysis (b) was performed on t-sne plot by all the expressed genes. (c) expression patterns and levels of selected marker genes projected on the t-sne plots. purple and yellow indicate lower and higher expressions, respectively. (d) construction of pseudotime-trajectory plot calculated with monocle software. the values of pseudotimes were indicated at the beginning of the trajectory (0) and the ends of branches (34.8 in branch 1 and 45.0 in branch 2). clusters 1–6 shown in (b) were projected on the trajectory in colors as indicated. (e) expression dynamics of the gene groups. pseudotime degs were divided into four gene groups (gg1 to gg4) depending on their expression dynamics. note that only clusters 1–3 were applied to this analysis. the graphs of expression patterns of gg1 to gg4 were shown on the left side. pseudotime attributions of clusters 1–3 cells were depicted in colors as indicated at the upper side of the graphs. solid and dashed lines indicate pseudotime-fitted curves of the average and standard deviations, respectively. the representative genes and enriched gene ontology terms of the gene groups were described on the right side.']. Reference sentences:[]
Summary: Trajectory analysis reveals gene expression dynamics during cell development, with pseudotime trajectory plot and gene group expression patterns.

Text 138
10.1016/j.celrep.2019.03.090
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 2. identification of pc types (a) tsne plots for pc clusters. (b) her4.1 expression in a tsne (left) and violin plot (vln) of single cell data (right), which contain all cell types. (c) her4.1 expression (left) and gfp expression (right), shown in tsne plots for pcs. also shown is her4.1-driven gfp staining on a telencephalon section (bottom). (d) tsne plots for some of the marker genes and relevant in situ hybridizations. pink arrowheads denote expression domains. (e) marker genes and localization of cell types on a representative telencephalic scheme. (f) cell trajectories on pseudotime generated by monocle2; all colors depict the cell cluster colors in (a). scale bars, 200 mm. see also figures s1–s3.']. Reference sentences:[of note as expected gfp is expressed in almost all her4.1 cells at higher levels (figure 2c; figure s2k).to find subtypes of pcs we ran clustering using only pcs iden- tified in figure 1 and using the same analysis steps described above except for using the ‘‘num.dims’’ value (an indicator of the number of dimensions used for the principal-component an- alyses) as 20 to increase the stringency for aligning and finding the iterative clusters (figure 2a; figures s2a-s2c and s2h).addition- ally by using all cells we could identify pc 0 pc 1 pc 2 and pc 4 cells and clearly separate them in tsne plots (figure 2a; figure s2c).we tested the validity and reliability of our tsne feature plots by comparing her4.1 and gfp plots with gfp expression in the her4.1-gfp transgenic zebrafish line (figure 2b) and observed that indeed gfp is a general indicator of pc populations (figure 2c).later we selected several regional markers from the in situ hybridization database and checked their localizations on feature plots (figure 2d; figure s3).as a result we identified deterministic marker expression for all pc clusters (figure 2d).pc 3 cells are the closest cells to pc 5 cells by expressing pcna and ascl1a but not mki67 and top2a and can be classified as non-proliferating neuroblast precursors or pre-neuroblasts (figure 2d; figures s2j).these two cell types do not show a regional locali- zation but are scattered along the ventricular region in the adult zebrafish telencephalon (figure 2d).these two cells are not radial glial cells but combined with the expression of other markers (e.g. zic1 krt8 and clu; figure 2d; figure s3) can be classified as neuroepithelium cells.these cells are mainly localized in the ventral (vv) telencephalon (based on zic1 and iqgap2 expression; figure 2d).pc 0 contains cells that express markers of the dorsal (dd) and dorsomedial (dm) part of the telencephalon (figure 2; pou3f1 and dmrta2).although pc 2 cells express dmrta2 and nr2f1b (dd markers; figure 2d) pc 4 cells express gsx2 and pou3f1 which are expressed more in the dm region (figure 2d).overall marker genes in situ expression and differential clus- tering reveal that the ventricular region of adult zebrafish telen- cephalon contains distinct progenitor subtypes that can be spatially defined (figure 2e).we found that pcs perfectly progressed from progenitor states toward proliferative states (figure 2f).]
Cell trajectories on pseudotime depict the progression of cell clusters from progenitor to proliferative states.

Text 139
10.1038/s41586-019-1146-y
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 2 | trajectory of organoid development. a, b, pseudotime ordering and trajectory inferences. c, diffusion maps for pooled lgr5+ and lgr5− organoids (n = 23,421). colour-coding denotes fixation time and lysozyme intensity (paneth cells). d, morphological features on pseudotime of lgr5+ (n = 9,798) and lgr5− (n = 13,623) organoids. ecc., eccentricity. e, cell types and proliferation markers on pseudotime (n = 23,421). f, nuclei number on pseudotime for lgr5+ (n = 4,104),']. Reference sentences:[lgr5+ cells strongly downregulate lgr5 expression during the first day and reacquire it only around 0.4 pseu- dotime (approximately 62 h) after the appearance of paneth cells (fig 2h extended data fig 5a b).]
Summary: Trajectory analysis reveals developmental progression and cell fate changes in organoids based on pseudotime ordering and trajectory inferences.

Text 140
10.1126/science.aav2501
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 1. single-cell rna-seq and cell trajectory analysis delineate the lineage hierarchy of adipocyte progenitors. (a) unsupervised clustering of 11,423 cells (mean number of genes per cell = 1977) from the subcutaneous wat of p12 pooled male and female c57bl/6j mouse pups reveals 10 distinct cell groups represented on a tsne map (relevant marker genes are listed in parentheses). (b) individual gene tsne']. Reference sentences:[unsupervised clustering of the gene expression profiles iden- tified 10 cell types (fig 1a).group 1 cells (blue) which we named “interstitial progenitors” were marked by the ex- pression of dpp4 [encoding dipeptidyl peptidase–4 (dpp4)] wnt2 bmp7 and pi16 but did not ex- press adipocyte markers (fig 1b and fig s2 and s3).group 2 cells expressed icam1 [encoding intercellular adhesion molecule–1 (icam1)] and dlk1 (pref1) along with several adipocyte iden- tity genes including pparg fabp4 and cd36 suggesting that these cells could be “committed preadipocytes” (fig 1b and fig s2 and s3).pseudotemporal analysis predicted that group 1 interstitial progenitors have two developmental trajectories: group 2 preadipo- cytes terminating as group 7 adipocytes (cell fate a) and group 3 and 4 cells (cell fate b) (fig 1c and fig s5).classical features of mesenchymal progenitor cellsincludeacapacityformultilineagedifferentiation merrick et al. science 364 eaav2501 (2019) 26 april 2019 2 of 11 fig 1.pref1 is another marker of group 2 (icam1+) cells in developing adipose tissue that was also previously defined as a pre- adipocyte marker (fig 1) (26).]
Cell fate trajectories from interstitial progenitors to preadipocytes and adipocytes based on gene expression profiles.

Text 141
10.1038/s41586-019-1158-7
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 2 | reconstruction of cerebellar developmental lineages through pseudo-temporal ordering of cells. a–c, t-sne visualization and twodimensional embedding showing constructed pseudo-time trajectories of different lineages in the developing cerebellum: astrocyte/bergmann glia lineage (n = 12,304 cells), early glutamatergic lineage (n = 14,358 cells) and late glutamatergic lineage (n = 14,662 cells). cells within']. Reference sentences:[on the basis of known developmental relationships and transcrip- tional similarity we constructed pseudo-time trajectories for the var- ious cerebellar lineages (fig 2 extended data fig 3).stem cells in the ventricular zone give rise to both gabaergic neurons (purkinje cells and gabaergic interneurons) as well as the cerebellar glia (fig 2a extended data fig 3b c).the url gives rise to excitatory neurons of the cerebellar nuclei gcps and ubcs (fig 2b c extended data fig 3d).article research extended data fig 2 | clustering analysis of scrna-seq data of mouse developing cerebellum from seven time points used for generating cibersort expression signatures.]
Summary: Pseudo-temporal trajectories of different lineages in cerebellar development based on transcriptional similarity and known relationships.

Text 142
10.1038/s41593-019-0393-4
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 2 | border-associated macrophages are heterogeneous and exhibit tissue-specific transcriptional signatures. a, tsne plot of 10,947macrophages pooled from the whole brain and border regions revealing the existence of six bam subsets. b, similar to a but with the colors representing the tissue origin of cells. c, bar plots showing the mean log2 normalized counts of previously reported microglial signature genes in microglia and the bam subsets that were identified in a. gene expression levels in classical monocytes (mo) from the dura mater are included as an additional reference. m, microglia. d, heatmap of normalized gene expression in microglia and the bam subsets that were identified in a. genes are grouped based on their signature expression in the indicated bam subsets. e, tsne maps showing the expression of various bam signature genes. f, scorpius trajectory inference on classical monocytes, mdcs and bams from the dura mater. cells were automatically ordered along a linear trajectory as shown. g, the top 100genes were clustered into seven gene modules (normalized expression) that correspond to the transition from monocytes to bams.']. Reference sentences:[a side-by-side com- parison was made of dura mater and cp samples that were isolated and processed either using our standard procedure or by imple- menting act-seq modifications which included the addition of the transcription inhibitor actinomycin d (actd) (supplementary fig 2a).remarkably cells from all clusters showed some level of segregation when comparing the two isolation procedures in both the dura (supplementary fig 2b) and cp (supplementary fig 2e) which was the result of a reduction in ieg expression in the actd samples (supplementary fig 2cdfg).when comparing standard and actd bams in the dura or cp iegs were strongly upregulated (supplementary fig 2dg).to further characterize bam heterogeneity and potential tissue-specific signa- tures microglia and bams from the whole brain or distinct border regions were re-analysed in a single dataset (fig 2a).this revealed six major bam subsets that clustered separately from microglia (fig 2ab).next we examined the expression of previously reported microg- lial signature genes2122 in the various bam subsets (fig 2c).bams exhibited distinct transcriptional states and we identified sets of signature genes that were either shared between the various bam subsets or were unique for a specific population (fig 2de).when performing scorpius trajectory inference23 on monocytes mdcs and bams from the dura these cells were ordered along a linear trajectory (fig 2f).the most predictive genes were clustered into modules which showed transcriptional gradients of genes that were lost or gained as cells moved from a monocytic state to mature bams (fig 2g).since cpepi-bams expressed sall1 (fig 2c) we used sall1creer:r26-yfp mice to trace these cells in the cp.]
Summary: Trajectory analysis reveals gene expression changes from monocytes to border-associated macrophages in different tissues.

Text 143
10.1126/science.aav2522
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 3. temporally progressing ap transcriptional states interact with conserved differentiation programs to generate neuronal diversity. (a) top: machine learning approach used to identify a core set of genes that can classify cells according to their date of birth (left) and differentiation status (right). center: model performance using actual dataset. box plots show medians ± sem. bottom: weight of the core genes in predicting birthdate and differentiation status. see also tables s1 and s2 and data s6. (b) top: birthdate-associated core genes are temporally dynamic and daughter cells acquire embryonic stage–specific transcriptional birthmarks. see also fig s7d. bottom: in contrast, differentiation status–associated core genes are conserved across corticogenesis. (c) the transcriptional dynamics of the core gene orthologs (top) and the corresponding temporal patterning of daughter neurons and their mother cells (bottom) are conserved in human embryonic neocortex [dataset from (7)]. (d) schematic representation of the findings. left: in the classical waddington epigenetic model, cellular diversity emerges through distinct developmental trajectories. right: the current data show that instead, in the neocortex, developmental trajectories are conserved but initial ground states are temporally dynamic.']. Reference sentences:[we used a machine learning strategy to classify cells based on (i) their birthdate and (ii) their differ- entiation status which identified core sets of genes (n = 100 per model) sufficient to classify all cells according to these two cardinal features (fig 3a; fig s7 a to c; and data s6) many of which have been previously identified as regu- lators of progenitor and neuronal fate (tables s1 and s2).birthdate-associated core genes were se- quentially expressed by aps and their 1- and 4-day old progeny revealing a shared temporal pat- terning of mother and daughter cells (fig 3b top and fig s7d).on the other hand the dy- namics of the differentiation gene set were con- served across embryonic ages consistent with a consensus postmitotic differentiation program as identified earlier (fig 3b bottom and fig s7d).this process is an evolutionarily conserved one because in human embryos the transcriptional dynamics of the orthologs of this gene set and the corresponding temporal patterning of daughter neurons and their mother cells was conserved in a large dataset of cortical cells (7) (fig 3c).taken together these data reveal an evolutionarily conserved specification process in which neuron type iden- tities emerge from temporally defined transcrip- tional ground states present in their mother cell onto which essentially conserved postmitotic dif- ferentiation programs are applied (fig 3d).to directly address the role of this complex in the telley et al. science 364 eaav2522 (2019) 10 may 2019 4 of 7 fig 3.(a) pseudo-time alignment of aps n1d and n4d using the birthdate core genes shown in fig 3 reveals an overall fading of temporal birthmarks as neurons differentiate particularly affecting e14-born l4-fated neurons.(a) cellular map in which cells are displayed according to their combined expression of the core genes of the birthdate and differen- tiation status presented in fig 3.]
Summary: Temporal progression of gene expression patterns in single cells during differentiation, with conserved differentiation programs generating cellular diversity.

Text 144
10.1093/eurheartj/ehz351
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 3 pseudotime trajectories of human embryonic stem cells-derived endothelial cell product differentiation. pseudotime trajectories containing cells from d4, d6, and d8 during (a) h9 differentiation and (b) rc11 differentiation. arrows show direction of pseudotime across trajectories. expression of known endothelial and mesenchymal (c) markers and (d) transcription factors in their respective branches for each of the two starting es cells (h9 and rc11).']. Reference sentences:[this likely reflects an epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition dur- ing mesoderm formation.23 pseudotime analysis is a complementary approach used to deter- mine the path and progress of individual cells undergoing differenti- ation.17 the resultant trajectory for h9 hesc-ecp differentiation (figure 3a) indicated a bifurcation point giving rise to distinct endothe- lial and mesenchymal branches consistent with the divergence repre- sented in figure 2a.pseudotime analysis using rc11 cells reproduced an essentially identical bifurcation point as using h9 (figure 3b).increasing expres- sion of known endothelial markers (figure 3c) and tf (figure 3d) defined the endothelial branch.similarly up-regulation of mesenchy- mal markers and tf (figure 3c and d) identified the mesenchymal branch (figure 3a).expression of the same markers and tf during the rc11 differentiation traced highly similar pseudotime trajectories (figure 3c and d).]
Summary: Trajectories of differentiation from two starting cells show bifurcation into endothelial and mesenchymal branches, with marker expression defining each branch.

Text 145
10.1093/eurheartj/ehz351
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 5 pseudotime analysis of transcription factor expression during human embryonic stem cell-derived endothelial cells differentiation. (a) differential gene expression variance over pseudotime of h9 differentiation within pseudotime trajectory branches. genes used are tf that are differentially expressed in both h9 and rc11-derived trajectories. (b) gene expression variance of tf taken from cluster 5 of heatmap from a in the endothelial branch of the trajectory from the five-factor protocol. (c) spline plots showing the expression of novel tf from b across pseudotime in rc11 and h9 human embryonic stem cell-derived endothelial cells differentiation using the original protocol, as well as for the five-factor protocol.']. Reference sentences:[of these several are known to be implicated in endothelial differenti- ation (erg ets1 sox7and elf128) and these all resided within cluster 5 (containing 37 genes) of genes differentially expressed across pseudotime (figure 5a).the expression profile of the 37 cluster 5 tf (figure 5a) was then visualized along the endothelial branch of the trajectory from the five-factor protocol (figure 5b).expression dynamics for the majority of tf showed substantial resemblance to those observed in the five- factor protocol (figure 5c; supplementary material online figure s15).in addition several tf with no clear reported link to endothelial differentiation also followed a similar expression profile and showed remarkable concordance across cells and protocols (figure 5c).]
Patterns of transcription factor expression along pseudotime trajectories during endothelial cell differentiation, including known and novel factors.

Text 146
10.1093/eurheartj/ehz351
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 4 longitudinal single-cell rna sequencing analysis of an alternative human embryonic stem cell-derived endothelial cells differentiation protocol. (a) tsne plot showing data of human embryonic stem cell-derived endothelial cells differentiation using an alternative protocol. cells taken for single-cell rna sequencing at d2, d4, and d6. (b) tsne plot of alternative differentiation protocol, categorizing cells according to their original data set. (c) signature scores shown on tsne plot from a. (d) key marker gene expression used to characterize identified clusters. (e) pseudotime trajectory containing cells from d4 clusters of the alternative differentiation protocol.']. Reference sentences:[unsupervised clustering revealed the presence of 12 in- dividual clusters (figure 4a and b).within the d2 population a large (22%) epithelial cluster was iden- tified characterized by expression of markers including epcam rab25 and cldn4 (figure 4c and d).interestingly d2 mesoderm was also positive for mesendo- derm markers such as gsc and eomes (figure 4c and d).by d4 37% of cells localized to a distinct endothelial population defined by expression of classical endothelial markers (figure 4a–d).the two-remaining major d4 clusters were defined by expression of mesodermal markers (figure 4a–d).in contrast to d2 d4 mesoderm was predominantly negative for expression of mesendoderm markers (figure 4d).at d6 a comparable hand1þ mesoderm population was present (figure 4a–d).the large d6 endothelial cluster accounted for 43% of d6 cells (figure 4a–d).about 10.3% of d6 cells localized to a small cluster exclusively expressing various known haemogenic markers including spn1 spi1 and runx125 (figure 4c and d).furthermore a small d6 cluster (10.7% of d6 cells) was annotated as being a nephro- genic population defined by expression of pax2 pax8 and crym26 (figure 4c and d).as expected the resultant trajectory (figure 4e) revealed cells from the ‘mesoderm 1’ cluster preceding those from ‘mesoderm 2’.endothelial and mesodermal cells populated the start of the endothelial branch thus suggesting that endothelial commitment from mesoderm was still in progress at d4 (figure 4e).]
Summary: Trajectory of cell differentiation from mesoderm to endothelial cells, with distinct clusters expressing specific markers at different time points.

Text 147
10.1016/j.celrep.2019.04.054
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 5. transcriptional dynamics of endodermis development (a) left: schematic representation of the trajectory of endodermis development. right: t-sne representation, as in figure 1b, with only the endodermis cells colored blue. (b) pseudotime trajectory of all 1,660 endodermis cells, generated using monocle (trapnell et al., 2014) (see star methods). each point indicates a unique cell, color coded by the original endodermis cluster as in (a). ‘‘major trajectory’’ indicates the pseudotime trajectory with most cells. (c) expression profiles along pseudotime for genes known to have dynamic expression during endodermal development. each point indicates the log-normalized expression of the indicated gene in a single cell. (d) right: heatmap showing the scaled and centered gene expression (z scores) of 798 genes that show dynamic expression over the major endodermis developmental trajectory by scrnaseq (see star methods). for this plot, all endodermis cells were divided into 20 bins, distributed uniformly across pseudotime. canonical endodermal development genes are noted in black along the left axis, with red indicating genes whose expression was validated in this study. genes were grouped by expression pattern, from top to bottom: early, middle, and late expression. left: top 5 gene ontology (go) terms in each group by fold enrichment (all significantly enriched; see table s5). numbers in parentheses indicate the number of genes in each category.']. Reference sentences:[we carried out a pseudotime analysis using monocle (trapnell et al. 2014) and focusing on endodermal cells which have a known trajectory from undifferentiated to state i (defined by the formation the casparian strip) to state ii (defined by the formation 2244 cell reports 27 2241–2247 may 14 2019 of a secondary cell wall made of suberin) (andersen et al. 2015) (figure 5a).pseudotime analysis performed separately on endo- dermis cells from sucrose+ or sucrose= growth conditions showed similar trajectories so all 1660 endodermis cells were combined for a single analysis (figure 5b).to properly orient the pseudotime axis relative to known endodermis differentia- tion we examined the profiles of genes known to be dynamically expressed during endodermal development (figure 5c).once we established the correctly oriented pseudotime trajec- tory we used it to ascertain additional genes that are dynami- cally regulated during endodermis development focusing on the primary developmental trajectory that included most endo- dermis cells (red arrow in figure 5b; see also star methods).the early expression gene group includes myb36 which is known to regulate the initial stages of endo- dermis differentiation (liberman et al. 2015) and this group is enriched for gene ontology (go) terms associated with water or ﬂuid transport (figure 5d; table s5).these reporter lines confirmed the strong expression pattern of at4cl1 in late endodermis (figure 5e) and the endodermis-specific expression of msl4 figure 5.three main clades of genes with differential expression over the main endodermis developmental trajectory were e3 cell reports 27 2241–2247.e1–e4 may 14 2019 identified using the cutree method in r. these three clades were reordered by gene expression timing (i.e. early middle late) for better visualization in figure 5d.]
Summary: Trajectory analysis of endodermis development, identifying genes with dynamic expression patterns along pseudotime.

Text 148
10.1126/sciadv.aav2249
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 2. pseudotime analysis in 5-plex time-course experiment. (a) monocle pseudotime trajectory of k562 cells treated with imatinib at different time points. cells are labeled by pseudotime (top) and drug treatment time (bottom). the 0-, 6-, 12-, 24-, and 48-hour samples consist of 133, 109, 79, 49, 58, 52, and 90 cells, respectively. (b) boxplot showing the distribution of pseudotime within each sample. (c) prominent gene expression alterations in 5-plex time-course experiments of imatinib treatment. note that the cells are labeled by drug treatment time and are not synchronously distributed over pseudotime. (d) expression heatmap showing 50 genes with the lowest q values. (e) expression heatmap showing degs between two transition states with q < 1 ×10−4. prebranch refers to the cells before branch 1, cell fate 1 refers to the cells of upper transition state, and cell fate 2 refers to the cells in the lower transition state.']. Reference sentences:[pseudotime analysis of single cells in multiplexed samples col- lected from five time points showed a branched gene expression tra- jectory and a sequential progression in trajectory over drug treatment time (fig 2a).the branched trajectory showed that two transition fig 2.samples exhibited asynchronous patterns in pseudotime although the average increased with drug treatment time (fig 2b).differential expression analysis over pseudotime identified several gene cohorts that change during the transition (fig 2 c and d).notably the expression levels of erythroid-related genes such as hbz and alas2 had increased over pseudotime (fig 2c).differentially expressed genes (degs) between the two transition states were also identified and different expression patterns between them were observed (fig 2e).fourteen drugs are classified into three groups according to their protein targets (see fig 2c top) and differential expression analysis is performed by comparing each group with dmso controls.to identify degs in fig 2d and fig s7 we performed likelihood ratio test between single cells in each drug s c i e n c e a d v a n c e s | r e s e a r c h a r t i c l e shin et al. sci.]
Summary: Asynchronous gene expression changes over pseudotime in response to drug treatment, with distinct patterns between transition states.

Text 149
10.1242/dev.178673
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 3. ureteric epithelium subclustering identifies known subpopulations and established developmental trajectories. a. reclustering of ureteric epithelium cells (k9 ue) identifies three ureteric (u) subclusters representing ureteric tip (u0 ut), cortical collecting duct (u1 ccd) and medullary collecting duct / urothelium (u2 mcd/uro). b. diagram of the relative location of these three ureteric epithelial cell types with respect to surrounding stromal populations. str- cs, cortical stroma; np, nephron progenitor; ms, medullary stroma; str- cd, collecting duct associated stroma. c. expression of key marker genes in ureteric epithelium subclusters. d. identification of differential signalling pathway activity across these three ue populations. e. pseudotime trajectory of the three ue subclusters reflects a developmental origin of all clusters from the ureteric tip, with cells progressing through the ccd with the final cell type state being mcd/uro. x and y axes represent independent component space, where the cells have been iteratively shifted onto the vertices of a spanning tree used to determine the trajectory. f. heat map of marker genes for subpopulations within the ureteric epithelium. clusters represent ut (mauve, cluster u0), ccd (pink, cluster u1) and mcd (blue, cluster u2).']. Reference sentences:[cells belonging to k9 were re- clustered resulting in the identification of three ureteric epithelium (u) sub-populations with differential expression defining marker genes corresponding to tips (u0) cortical (u1) and medullary (u2) segments of the ureteric epithelium (fig 3a-c table s3) (thiagarajan et al. 2011).the cluster enriched for medullary collecting duct marker genes also contained genes expressed in the urothelium of the renal pelvis (fig 3c) (thiagarajan et al. 2011).this indicated the activity of several pathways known to be involved in ureteric tip development such as wnt retinoic acid tgf fgf and hippo signalling (fig 3d) (reginensi et al. 2015; yuri et al. 2017).pseudotime analysis of cells from kidney cluster k9 using monocle 2 (qiu et al. 2017) replicated the established developmental trajectory from tip progenitor to cortical then medullary collecting duct and identified cohorts of genes that change during this progression (fig 3ef).development • accepted manuscript figure 3.]
Developmental trajectory of ureteric epithelium cells from tip to cortical to medullary collecting duct, identified by marker genes and pathway activity.

Text 150
10.1242/dev.178673
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 5. nephron progenitor subpopulations. a. expression of key nephron progenitor (np) subpopulation markers across np clusters in the nephron lineage analysis including two cell cycle (cc)-associated, one stromal (str)-like, and a pretubular aggregate (pta) cluster. scale represents logfc differential expression within the nephron lineage. b. monocle 2 analysis of early nephron lineage clusters identifies a trajectory for np-str cluster cells distinct from the expected np-pta trajectory taken by most cells. x and y axes represent']. Reference sentences:[the three remaining nephron progenitor clusters expressed cluster specific de markers (fig 5a).2) ‘primed’ (n6) with lower levels of six2 and cited1 expression of notch2 and sprouty2 and low levels of renal vesicle marker jag1 and 3) a nephron progenitor-stromal population (n10) with modest expression of commitment markers and stromal characteristics including expression of pdgfra and col3a1 (fig 5a).hence cluster n6 may represent a transitional state between nephron progenitor and pta n4 (fig 5a).pseudotime analysis of all cells within early nephron clusters (n0 np to n4 pta fig 5b) reproduced the expected developmental trajectory from nephron progenitor to pta.cell cycle-associated cluster np7 grouped with pta cluster n4 representing a more committed state (fig 5b).of note cells from the n6 np cluster were also present with the n10 np-str cluster (fig 5b) sorted nephron progenitors recapitulate np cell states identified in whole kidney to gain a deeper insight into nephron progenitor sub populations within the developing mouse kidney 7853 six2gfp+ nephron progenitor cells from three pooled replicates of e14.5 kidney were isolated using fluorescence activated cell sorting from the six2gce mouse line (kobayashi et al. 2008) and profiled using scrnaseq.we refer to the resulting clusters as nephron progenitor (np) clusters 0-9 (np0-np9 fig 5c).cells from both whole kidney and sorted nps were present in all clusters (fig 5d fig s4).while np cells across all clusters expressed stromal markers (meis1 lgals1 and meg3) pdgfra was enriched in np7 (fig 5d).trajectory analysis of nephron progenitors from clusters np0 np3 np4 and np7 (fig 5e) reproduced the trajectory analysis of nephron progenitors from the whole kidney data (fig 5b).stochastic expression of stromal markers in nephron progenitor cells has been reported at the single cell level (magella et al. 2017) and expression of stromal markers foxd1 and meis1 within our analysis suggests this may be more than random expression (fig 5d).using a constitutively active six2cre (six2tgc) six2-derived cells were observed in the cortical and medullary stroma in all samples (fig 5f).using an inducible six2cre (six2gce induced from e12.5) to assess np contributions to stroma after the establishment of the proposed lineage boundary did result in rare six2-derived cells in the nephrogenic zone that did not express six2 protein but labelled cells were observed at a frequency lower than expected based on np7 cluster size and most labelled cells were unusually small suggesting they may be undergoing apoptosis (fig 5g).lineage tracing from an inducible pdgfra stromal cre activated at e13.5 and assessed at e18.5 did not label cells within the nephron progenitor population or nephron lineage (fig 5h).six2 antibody staining did not overlap with a transgenic mouse line expressing nuclear pdgfra-gfp (fig 5i) despite transcripts for six2 and pdgfra being co-expressed in the scrna-seq data.development • accepted manuscript figure 5.]
Summary: Trajectory analysis reveals distinct developmental paths of nephron progenitor subpopulations, with a transitional state between progenitor and stromal clusters.

Text 151
10.1016/j.neuron.2019.04.010
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 4. sccogaps analysis on scrnaseq samples reveals patterns of gene expression within developmental processes (a) correlation heatmap of pattern weight with cell types. (b–d) heatmaps of the top 20 genes by gene weight of patterns (b) 16, (c) 34, and (d) 70 that correspond to horizontal cells, amacrine cells, and rod photoreceptors, respectively. (e and f) examples of graphical representations of pattern weights of individual cells within the umap-dimension reduction. (e) pattern 15 marks the terminal trajectory of rgcs. (f) pattern 36, with pattern marker xist, highlights sex of origin. (g) combinations of patterns can be used to assess developmental processes such as the inﬂuence of cell-cycle phase on rpc clustering. (h) sccogaps pattern weights of retinal cells plotted within the complex pseudotime (figure 2a) highlights photoreceptor-bipolar cell precursors in pattern 30, using otx2 as a pattern marker. abbreviations: photo precurs, photoreceptor precursors.']. Reference sentences:[unlike other methods that learn gene signa- pattern 30 2.5 5.0 7.5 log10(pattern weight) -4 -2 0 2 4 6 -4 -2 0 2 4 6 -4 -2 0 2 4 6 4 2 0 -2 -4 -4 -2 0 2 4 -4 -2 0 2 4 6 pattern 31 pattern 49 pattern 78 pattern 36 -4 6 -2 0 2 4 6 -2 -4 0 2 4 -4 -2 0 2 4 pattern 15 early rpcs late rpcs horizontal amacrine rgcs cones rods muller glia bipolar neurogenic photo precurs patt.18 patt.8 patt.48 patt.74 patt.20 patt.67 patt.19 patt.41 patt.17 patt.37 patt.43 patt.7 patt.16 patt.1 patt.2 patt.5 patt.73 patt.69 patt.34 patt.59 patt.44 patt.12 patt.42 patt.39 patt.55 patt.46 patt.79 patt.54 patt.61 patt.68 patt.21 patt.70 patt.40 patt.66 patt.3 patt.51 patt.45 patt.72 patt.47 patt.6 patt.38 patt.13 patt.26 patt.33 patt.9 patt.27 patt.62 patt.53 patt.10 patt.56 patt.75 patt.15 patt.35 patt.71 patt.29 patt.63 patt.28 patt.76 patt.50 patt.60 patt.58 patt.77 patt.65 patt.32 patt.4 patt.30 patt.52 patt.11 patt.80 patt.22 patt.36 patt.57 patt.24 patt.31 patt.49 patt.25 patt.78 patt.64 patt.14 patt.23 celltype −2 −1 0 1 2 3 znorm muller glia neurogenic early rpcs late rpcs cones photo precurs bipolar rods rgcs amacrine horizontal malat1 meg3 snap25 stmn2 ina stmn4 tmsb10 tuba1a tubb2b stmn3 mllt11 rtn1 tmsb4x nefl nefm lhx1os onecut2 pcsk1n nnat tfap2b gene celltype −1 0 1 2 3 znorm late rpcs early rpcs neurogenic bipolar photo precurs muller glia cones rods rgcs amacrine horizontal hist3h2ba nnat sox4 tagln3 dpysl3 sox11 cd24a elavl3 actb crmp1 mllt11 rtn1 stmn2 tuba1a tubb2b tubb3 basp1 tmsb10 ckb malat1 celltype −1 0 1 2 znorm gene pattern 16 - top 20 genes by pattern weight - horizontal pattern pattern 34 - top 20 genes by pattern weight - amacrine pattern rods rgcs early rpcs late rpcs neurogenic photo precurs amacrine horizontal muller glia bipolar cones tmsb4x btg1 malat1 sec62 2010107e04rik cox17 ttc14 gpx4 golgb1 tmem243 gnb1 ssu72 ktn1 guk1 ndufa4 syngr1 rsrp1 tax1bp1 dohh tma7 −1 0 1 2 znorm pattern 70 - top 20 genes by pattern weight - rod pattern celltype gene a b c d e f g h figure 4. sccogaps analysis on scrna- seq samples reveals patterns of gene expression within developmental processes (a) correlation heatmap of pattern weight with cell types.individual patterns reﬂect cell- type specification and capture key devel- opmental transitions including popula- tions such as neurogenic rpcs and photoreceptor precursors (stein-o’brien et al. 2019) (figure 4a).while patterns can distinguish cell types and correlated well for example with annotations of hor- izontal cells (patterns 1 2 and 16) (figure 4a) many genes with high gene weights within individual patterns showed expression across multiple cell types (figures 4b–4d).additional patterns are also associated with mature rgcs (pattern 15) (figure 4e) or recover other phenotypic features of these data such as sex (pattern 36) (figure 4f).plotting pattern weights on pseudotime representations (fig- ure s16) highlights the association of patterns with develop- mental transitions (figure 4h; photoreceptor-bipolar cell precursors with high otx2 expression).]
Patterns in single-cell transcriptomics data related to trajectory capture developmental processes and cell-type specification, such as photoreceptor precursors and sex of origin.

Text 152
10.1038/s41592-019-0425-8
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 4 | comparisons of scrna-seq trajectory analysis methods. a, the trajectory path chosen for the rna mixture dataset (top) (n=340) and cell mixture dataset (bottom) (n=169) along with visualizations of the output from slingshot, monocle-ddrtree and slicer. cells are colored by the proportion of h2228 rna present, which was chosen as the root of the trajectory. b, violin plot showing the pearson correlation coefficient between the calculated pseudotime and the ground truth, for the best performing combination of each method on each dataset. stars indicate the mean values (n=8 for cellmix, n=4 for rnamix). c, the proportion of cells that are correctly assigned to the trajectory. stars indicate the mean values (n=8 for cellmix, n=4 for rnamix).']. Reference sentences:[although a wide range of silhouette widths was observed among different methods in different data- sets most normalization methods apart from tmm markedly increased silhouette width relative to the unnormalized data (fig 2a and supplementary fig 4ab).for simplicity we chose h2228 as the root state of the trajectory (fig 4a).we evaluated the correlation between the pseudotime generated from each method and the rank order of the path from h2228 to the other cell lines on the basis of the cell–rna mixture information (fig 4b) to exam- ine whether each method can position cells in the correct order.in addition we calculated the coverage of the trajectory path (fig 4c) which is the proportion of cells that have been assigned to the cor- rect path and assesses the sensitivity of the method.for each method in each dataset we selected the best results from all combinations on the basis of the performance metrics (fig 4bc).slingshot and monocle2 showed robust results according to both metrics and generated meaningful representations of the trajectory while slingshot sometimes gave an extra trajectory path (fig 4a and supplementary fig 7).slingshot does not perform dimensionality reduction itself and presents the result as is whereas monocle2 uses ddr-tree for dimensionality reduction by default and tends to place cells at the nodes of the tree rather than in transi- tion between two nodes (fig 4a).]
Summary: Evaluation of trajectory analysis methods based on pseudotime correlation and trajectory path coverage, with Slingshot and Monocle2 showing robust results.

Text 153
10.1016/j.celrep.2019.04.102
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 5. single-cell trajectory analysis using monocle 2 and scgps pseudotime analysis of single cells using monocle 2. (a–c) cells on the tree are colored by cluster assignment (a), pseudotime (b), or state (c). the top 500 genes with the highest variability in expression were used to construct the pseudotime tree. the arrangement of cells on the tree (b) shows the cells on the left side of the tree (dark blue) are less differentiated than those on the right side (light blue). overlaying the cluster information (a) shows that these cells correspond to the progenitor cells in cluster two (evp) and clusters one and three (d and d0), which display a more differentiated endothelial expression profile. cell states (c) are calculated by monocle 2 and classify the cells that are on the same branch as being most similar based on their pseudotime values. (d) scgps was used to calculate the proportion of cells with the potential to transition from one subpopulation to another. the transition scores for each, representing the percentage of cells with transcriptional potential to transition, reveal predominantly stable populations at each stage of differentiation.']. Reference sentences:[we observed a branch point arising mainly from cluster one (state 4; figure 5c) that split into two branches: one comprised of d cells (state 5) and another comprised of cells from clusters one and three (state 6).discussion endothelial heterogeneity is a more and more accepted hallmark of blood vessel biology with subpopulations identified across or figure 5.]
Summary: Single-cell trajectory analysis reveals differentiation patterns along a pseudotime tree, with stable populations at each stage of differentiation.

Text 154
10.1038/s41467-019-10291-0
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 4 human lin−cd34/cd164 versus mouse kit+ transcriptome map and gene expression dynamics analysis. a classification of individual cells into 11 homogenous transcriptional groups, based on inferred principal trajectories on mouse kit+ transcriptome data (supplementary fig 3c for details). group labels and colors have been set to highlight similarities with lin−cd34/cd164 fractionating map. solid lines show results based on final converged iteration (supplementary fig 3c for details). dashed lines added manually to highlight a potential additional trajectory not present in final iteration and']. Reference sentences:[color legend as in a. gene expression maps are available in supplementary fig 4. c predicted hierarchy based on two steps pba.notably we see the same progression from trib2- expressing to ca2-expressing erythroid progenitors (fig 4c) suggesting the existence of the same two precursors subclasses in humans.in this regard our data also confirm and expand the information on the divergence of human and mouse erythropoiesis31 (fig 4c).]
Summary: Trajectory analysis reveals distinct cell groups and gene expression dynamics, suggesting conserved erythroid progenitor subclasses between human and mouse.

Text 155
10.1038/s41556-019-0336-z
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 3 | transcriptional regulation of asm fate specification. a, pseudotemporal expression profiles of indicated genes along the asm trajectory. x axis: normalized pseudotime as defined in fig 2. y axis: relative expression levels. black curves indicate the smoothed expression. red dashed lines indicate the transitions between predicted regulatory states, indicated as in fig 2d, and purple dashed lines indicate the calculated activation pseudotime. b, heatmap of smoothed expression profiles along the asm trajectory showing primed pan-cardiac genes (inhibited, left) and candidate de novo asm genes (activated, right). white vertical lines mark transitions between indicated regulatory states along the asm trajectory. c, violin plots showing the log2(fold change, fc) of candidate asm-specific genes (n=159) in response to indicated perturbations of ebf function, a dominant-negative (ebfdn) and ebf overexpression (ebfoe) as in ref. 4. the white bars indicate the interquartile range. the black whiskers extending from the bars represent the upper (maximum) and lower (minimum) adjacent values in the data. the black lines in the middle of the bars show the median values. d, chord diagram showing mutual enrichment of asm versus cardiac genes among candidate target genes activated or inhibited by ebf. ebf is predicted to downregulate a few asm candidate genes, which are primed and quickly downregulated after asm specification (for example hand-r, ref. 4). e, heatmap of smoothed expression profiles for candidate asm-specific ebf target genes defined in ref. 4, showing activation pseudotimes in regulatory states asm2 and asm3 (left, blue bars). white vertical lines mark transitions between indicated regulatory states. f, predicted induction pseudotime of candidate asm-specific ebf target genes (black dashed lines separate corresponding asm regulatory states).']. Reference sentences:[to our surprise the majority of newborn pharyngeal muscle precur- sors isolated from 16 hpf larvae clustered with multipotent progeni- tors isolated from 14 hpf embryos (stvcs fig 2de) although they were already expressing ebf (fig 3a) as previously observed using fish1824.indeed the pharyngeal muscle transcriptome is progressively remodelled as cells transition through successive states involving both downregu- lation of primed cardiac markers and de novo activation of pha- ryngeal muscle markers (fig 3ab and supplementary fig 5abd).moreover systematic comparison with expression profiles following perturbations of ebf function19 indicated that candidate ebf target genes including myogenic regulatory factor (mrf) (the myod/myf5 homologue) and myosin heavy chain 3 (mhc3) are activated at later times consistent with ebf-dependent transitions to committed pha- ryngeal muscle states24 (fig 3ac–f and supplementary fig 5c).examining our list of markers distinguishing shps and fhps we identified the dachs- hund homologue dach as the only known transcription regulator32 (fig 6a supplementary fig 3a and supplementary table 2) and its upregulation as cells transitioned from a multipotent state suggested a role in specifying the second cardiac identity (fig 6ab).dach1 expression was excluded from the nkx2-5+ ventricle and absent from the isl1+ skeletal muscle progenitor cells in the core mesoderm of the first and second pharyngeal arches (fig 8b and supplementary fig 7) in a manner reminiscent of dach exclusion from the pharyngeal muscles in ciona (fig 6ef and supplementary fig 3a).]
Summary: Trajectory analysis reveals transitions from primed cardiac to activated pharyngeal muscle markers, influenced by ebf function, in single cells.

Text 156
10.1038/s41556-019-0336-z
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 4 | a pan-cardiac programme for heart fate specification. a, smoothed gene expression along fhp pseudotime for de novo expressed pan-cardiac genes (activated) and primed asm genes (downregulated). white vertical lines: transitions between predicted regulatory states. b, pc1 correlates with pseudotime. sample size (cells on the fhp trajectory) n=379. c, average pc1-loading scores for the indicated gene categories, mapped onto the fhp trajectory. d, proportions of de novo pan-cardiac and fhp-specific genes with the calculated activation pseudotime in binned pseudotime windows along the fhp trajectory. e, expression profiles of mmp21 along the fhp trajectory. purple dashed line: calculated activation pseudotime. circle colours: samples of origin as in fig 2b. f, activation pseudotimes for de novo expressed pan-cardiac genes along first- and second heart lineage pseudotime axes. g, proportions of de novo expressed pan-cardiac genes with the calculated activation pseudotime in binned pseudotime windows along the fhp and shp trajectories. for d,e,g, x axis: normalized pseudotime. black dashed lines: transitions between regulatory states.']. Reference sentences:[using the whole dataset while ignor- ing established clonality we identified multipotent progenitors and separate cardiac and pharyngeal muscle branches (supplementary fig 4a).validating this approach in silico trajec- tories captured known lineage-specific expression changes of car- diopharyngeal regulators181924 (supplementary fig 4c–e).however the latter occur preferentially in defined ‘pseudotime’ windows for multiple genes (supplementary fig 4c–e) consistent with more abrupt biological transitions such as cell divisions24.using constrained hierarchical clus- tering25 we identified 10 putative discrete regulatory states across the cardiopharyngeal trajectories including two multipotent states and eight successive transitions towards fate restriction (fig 2d and supplementary fig 4b).conversely primed pharyngeal muscle mark- ers such as hand-r were downregulated along cardiac trajectories as expected26 (fig 2f and supplementary fig 4c–e).activation of de novo pan-cardiac markers and downregulation of primed pharyngeal muscle and multipotent- specific markers accounted for most gene expression changes (fig 4a and supplementary fig 5e–g).we identified a principal component (principal component 1 pc1) which correlated highly with pseudotime (pcc = 0.96; fig 4b) and used the pc1 loading of each gene to estimate the relative contribution of each class of markers to discrete regulatory states (fig 4c).the latter is defined by the virtual absence of tvc- specific and primed asm-specific transcripts and high levels of both primed and de novo expressed pan-cardiac markers thus probably corresponding to a heart-specific state whereas activa- tion of cell-type/lineage-specific genes underlies the fhp2-to- fhp3 transition and their expression helps define the first heart lineage-specific state fhp3 as is the case for mmp21 (fig 4de).accordingly we observed a striking agreement between the ordered activation pattern of individual genes along each trajectory (fig 4f) suggesting a remarkably conserved devel- opmental programme.]
Summary: Trajectory analysis reveals gene expression changes along cardiac fate specification, with transitions between regulatory states and activation of pan-cardiac genes.

Text 157
10.1038/s41556-019-0336-z
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 6 | a second heart lineage-specific tbx1/10-dach pathway. a, smoothed gene expression along the shp trajectory for shp-specific genes. white vertical lines: transitions between regulatory states. b, dach expression pattern along the shp trajectory. c, perturbations of dach function do not alter ebf expression in asmps. numbers: observed/total. d, dach and tbx1/10 are required to restrict mmp21 activation to the fhps. bar plots: proportions of larvae showing the indicated phenotypes in each experimental condition. foxf>dachpammut: tvc-specific foxf enhancer driving expression of crisprresistant dach cdna. e, tbx1/10 function is required for dach expression in shps. second and fourth panels: segmented dach+ dots superimposed on cell patterns. (c–e) confocal microscopy stacks acquired for 10 larvae in each condition in biological duplicates. none of the 20 tbx1/10crispr larvae showed dach expression in shps. filled arrowheads, asmps; open arrowheads, shps; arrows, fhps. f, fgf-mapk signalling negatively regulates dach expression in tbx1/10+ asmfs. representative confocal microscopy stacks showing segmented dach+ dots in 18.5hpf (st. 27) larvae. blocking mek activity causes ectopic dach expression in the asmfs (filled arrowheads), in addition to its endogenous expression in the shps (open arrowheads) (n=10/10 for each condition). dmso, dimethylsulfoxide. g, combined tbx1/10 overexpression and mapk inhibition induced precocious dach expression in 14hpf b7.5 lineage cells. open arrowheads, stvcs; arrows, fhps; dotted line, midline (m). violin plots represent the distribution of dach+ dots per cell. black dots: cells with identity and experimental perturbation indicated below. red dots: mean values. thin red line: the upper (maximum) and lower (minimum) adjacent values in the data. a one-tailed student t-test indicates precocious dach expression in both fhps and stvcs in the combined tbx1/10 overexpression and mapk inhibition condition. p=9.972×10−5; #p=0.005275. (c–g) mrnas visualized using fish (green) or segmented (green dots). mesp>nls::lacz, revealed by anti-β-galactosidase antibody (red), marks nuclei. mesp>hcd4::mcherry, revealed by anti-mcherry antibody (blue), marks cell membranes. dotted line: midline (m). anterior to the left. scale bar, 10μm.']. Reference sentences:[examining our list of markers distinguishing shps and fhps we identified the dachs- hund homologue dach as the only known transcription regulator32 (fig 6a supplementary fig 3a and supplementary table 2) and its upregulation as cells transitioned from a multipotent state suggested a role in specifying the second cardiac identity (fig 6ab).lineage-specific clustered regularly inter- spaced short palindromic repeats (crispr)/cas9-mediated loss of function3637 followed by gene expression assays indicated that dach is not required either for activation of the pharyngeal muscle marker ebf or for its exclusion from the shps (fig 6c).by contrast loss of dach function caused ectopic expression of the fhp marker mmp21 in the shps (fig 6d).a crispr-resistant dachpammut complementary dna rescued the ectopic mmp21 expression in the second heart lineage but did not abolish endogenous mmp21 expression in the first heart lineage (fig 6d).crispr/cas9-mediated lineage-specific loss of tbx1/10 function27 inhibited dach expression (fig 6e) and caused ectopic activation of mmp21 (fig 6d) indicating that tbx1/10 promotes second heart lineage specification in part by regulating dach acti- vation in addition to its role in pharyngeal myogenesis.to explore the mechanism distin- guishing between tbx1/10 dual functions we used the map-kinase kinase (mek) inhibitor u0126 which inhibits ebf expression24 and caused ectopic dach activation in the lateral-most cardiopharyn- geal cells that normally form ebf+ pharyngeal muscle precursors (fig 6f).moreover tbx1/10 misexpression and mek inhibition synergized to cause precocious and ectopic dach activation in cardiopharyngeal progenitors (fig 6g).dach1 expression was excluded from the nkx2-5+ ventricle and absent from the isl1+ skeletal muscle progenitor cells in the core mesoderm of the first and second pharyngeal arches (fig 8b and supplementary fig 7) in a manner reminiscent of dach exclusion from the pharyngeal muscles in ciona (fig 6ef and supplementary fig 3a).]
Patterns related to cell trajectory and lineage specification are shown, with dach regulating second heart identity and tbx1/10 restricting mmp21 activation.

Text 158
10.1038/s41556-019-0336-z
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 2 | reconstruction of cardiopharyngeal developmental trajectories. a, cell lineages used to reconstruct three unidirectional cardiopharyngeal trajectories. b, diffusion maps showing the cardiopharyngeal trajectories. the colour-coded cell identities are defined by unsupervised clustering from larvae dissociated at indicated times (supplementary fig 1a). black lines, principal curves; light grey contours, single-cell density distributions. the colour coding corresponds to assigned cell identities following clustering at each time. dc, diffusion coordinate. c, distribution of identified cell types isolated at defined times along the trajectories, showing the general agreement between the time series and developmental progression, but also that cells isolated at a given time are not all at the same developmental pseudotime. d, cross-correlation heatmaps to infer regulatory states along the trajectories. left: dendrograms obtained from constrained hierarchical clustering. the top bars indicate the sample of origin with colour coding as in c. e, relative cell identity composition for each regulatory state identified on the trajectories. note the 16asm cells clustering with the ‘stvc’ state in the asm trajectory, indicating that these cells retain most stvc characteristics and have not yet activated the asm-specific programme. f, pseudotemporal expression profiles of indicated genes along the fhp trajectory. x axis, normalized pseudotime as defined in b; y axis, relative expression level. black curves indicate the smoothed expression. black dashed lines indicate the transitions between predicted regulatory states as defined in d and colour-coded below. purple dashed lines indicate calculated activation or inactivation pseudotime. dot colours refer to the sample of origin as indicated in c. g, proportions of primed versus de novo expressed genes among defined categories of marker genes.']. Reference sentences:[the top 111 predicted pan-cardiac genes comprised established cardiac determinants including gata4/5/6 nk4/nkx2-5 and hand and we confirmed heart-specific expression by fluorescent in situ hybridization (fish) for 19 candidate markers including meis and lrp4/8 (fig 1d supplementary fig 2a and supplementary tables 2 and 3).x axis: normalized pseudotime as defined in fig 2. y axis: relative expression levels.red dashed lines indicate the transitions between predicted regulatory states indicated as in fig 2d and purple dashed lines indicate the calculated activation pseudotime.circle colours: samples of origin as in fig 2b.taking advantage of the invariant lineage (fig 1a) we combined cells corresponding to each branch and created three unidirectional trajectories representing first and second heart and pharyngeal muscle lineages (fig 2ab).the distribution of cells along pseudotime axes corresponded to the times of origin (fig 2c; average pearson correlation coefficient pcc = 0.889) while providing higher-resolution insights into the gene expression dynamics.using constrained hierarchical clus- tering25 we identified 10 putative discrete regulatory states across the cardiopharyngeal trajectories including two multipotent states and eight successive transitions towards fate restriction (fig 2d and supplementary fig 4b).for example the multipotent cardiopha- ryngeal progenitor state (trunk ventral cell tvc) differed mark- edly from subsequent cardiac states along the first cardiac trajectory (fig 2de) and gene expression mapping distinguished ‘primed’ and ‘de novo’-expressed heart markers such as gata4/5/6 and slit1/2/3 respectively (fig 2f).conversely primed pharyngeal muscle mark- ers such as hand-r were downregulated along cardiac trajectories as expected26 (fig 2f and supplementary fig 4c–e).nevertheless 88% (3504/3982) of late-expressed transcripts were already detected in multipotent progenitors (fig 2g) indicating extensive stability of the global transcriptome and thus showing that de novo cell-type- specific gene activation contributes significantly to cell-type-spe- cific programmes (that is the fractions of de novo expressed genes among cell-type-specific markers are greater than expected by chance fisher’s exact test p < 2.2 × 10−16 for both the pan-cardiac- and asm-specific gene sets).the first two reg- ulatory states corresponded to successive generations of multipo- tent cardiopharyngeal progenitors (tvcs and second trunk ventral cells stvcs fig 2de) confirming that asymmetric cell divisions provide the biological basis for these first transitions (fig 1a).to our surprise the majority of newborn pharyngeal muscle precur- sors isolated from 16 hpf larvae clustered with multipotent progeni- tors isolated from 14 hpf embryos (stvcs fig 2de) although they were already expressing ebf (fig 3a) as previously observed using fish1824.for example we used logistic regression to determine that slit1/2/3 is activated at the transition between the multipo- tent and fhp1 states which we confirmed by fish (fig 2f and supplementary fig 2b).]
Patterns related to developmental trajectories, regulatory states, and gene expression dynamics along pseudotime axes in single cells.

Text 159
10.1038/s41586-019-1289-x
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 3 | cells in organoids are generated following a precise and reproducible trajectory and are transcriptionally similar to cells of the human fetal cortex. a, b, pseudotime t-sne plots for the three-month (a) and six-month (b) organoids shown in figs. 1d, 2a, coloured according to cell type (far left) and pseudotime trajectory (centre left; yellow (early) to green (late)). right, contribution of each batch of organoids to the pseudotime plots. n = 3 individual organoids per batch, downsampled to 35,000 cells per time point. c, top, immunohistochemistry for neuronal (map2) and excitatory presynaptic (vglut1) and postsynaptic (psd95) markers in three-month pgp1 and 11a dorsally patterned organoids; co-localization is shown in white (arrows). bottom, vglut1 and psd95 staining; insets, enlarged view of boxed areas. scale bars, 10 μm. d, agreement between cell-type classifications in the human fetal cortex18 and in cell populations of organoids at three months (n = 3 individual organoids per batch). dot size and colour intensity indicate the percentage of cells in each organoid cell type assigned to each human cell type by a random forest classifier. e, spearman correlation coefficients of variable gene expression in human fetal cortex18 with equivalent cell types found in dorsally patterned forebrain organoids (n as in figs. 1d and 2a) and self-patterned whole-brain organoids3 (n = 19 individual organoids, 4 independent batches).']. Reference sentences:[despite the long culture period molecular markers of apoptosis and hypoxia remained low (extended data fig 3a–e).confirming neuronal maturation co-localization of the pre- and post-synaptic markers vglut1 and psd95 suggested the presence of excitatory synapses at this time point (fig 3c).organoid cells at both three and six months were predominantly assigned to the correspond- ing endogenous cell class indicating that their transcriptional profiles were similar to endogenous cells (fig 3d and extended data fig 4b).finally scrublet v.0.139 was used to assess the effect of droplets that may have contained more than one cell with an expected doublet rate of 0.1 and a score threshold of 0.39 chosen based on histo- grams of simulated doublet scores (extended data fig 3f).to calculate correlations between cell types (as in fig 3e) we assigned cell types to cells in ref.]
Summary: Cells in organoids follow a consistent trajectory similar to human fetal cortex cells, confirmed by gene expression correlations and cell type assignments.

Text 160
10.1038/s41590-019-0398-x
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 3 | focused analysis of kidney myeloid cells. a, five clusters of myeloid cells were identified. the heatmaps show the expression of either canonical lineage markers (top) or genes differentially upregulated in each cluster (bottom). b, the results of classifying the kidney myeloid cells by correlating their gene expression to a set of ten reference clusters (mono1–mono4, dc1–dc6), taken from villani et al.12. for each of the five clusters identified in our data, the bars denote the percentage of cells most similar to each of the reference clusters. the percentage of cells mapped to the most frequent reference cluster in each case is specified on the corresponding bar. c, the distribution of highest pearson correlation values per kidney myeloid cell, when compared with the reference clusters in villani et al. the percentage of cells in each cluster for which the correlation score was above the assignability threshold is specified above the plot, followed by the number of cells in the cluster (n); the assignability threshold itself is denoted by the horizontal dashed line. d, the cells of clusters cm0 (red), cm1 (purple) and cm4 (blue), presented in two dimensions using diffusion maps. the arrow represents the direction of the putative transition between these three clusters, as explained in the text. e, the change in the inflammatory response score, calculated as the average scaled expression of several pro-inflammatory genes, along the trajectory shown in d; ‘pseudotime’ represents the ordering of the cells along this trajectory. the violin plots (shades) show the distribution of expression levels in equally spaced intervals along the pseudotime axis (and do not directly correspond to cell clusters). f, same as e, but with regard to a set of genes associated with phagocytosis. cdcs, conventional dendritic cells.']. Reference sentences:[focused analysis of the 466 cells in myeloid clusters c4 and c6 revealed 5 finer clusters (clusters cm0–cm4; fig 3a and supplementary fig 3a–c).we determined their putative identity by comparing their global gene expression patterns with those of published reference monocyte/dendritic cell (dc) clusters identified in blood samples of healthy individuals using scrna-seq12 (fig 3bc) and by the expression of canonical lineage markers.cluster cm3 was closest to cd1c+ dcs (reference clusters dc2 and dc3) or clec9a+ dcs (reference cluster dc1) in accordance with the expression of the canonical dc markers cd1c and flt3 (supplementary fig 3a) and the lack of expres- sion of monocyte markers cd14 and cd16.we next determined whether the pattern of gene expression in each cluster could indicate functional capabilities (supplementary fig 3a).this cluster demonstrated low expression of cd14 cd16 cx3cr1 and ccr2 and no clear similarity to the published reference clusters of peripheral myeloid subsets (fig 3bc).dimensionality reduction using either diffusion maps21 (fig 3d) or t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding22 (tsne; fig 2a) indicated possible transitions between the three clusters of infiltrating monocytes/macrophages with cm1 linking cm0 and cm4.furthermore since the cells in cluster cm0 tended to be the most similar to peripheral blood cd16+ monocytes while the cells in cluster cm4 were the least similar (fig 3c) the suggested progres- sion is from an inflammatory blood monocyte (cm0) to a phago- cytic (cm1) and then an alternatively activated (cm4) phenotype.overall a general downregulation of inflammatory genes and a concurrent upregula- tion of genes associated with phagocytosis (supplementary table 6) was observed along this trajectory (fig 3ef).we used drop- let-based scrna-seq yielding 1411 sorted high-quality myeloid blood cells that included a subpopulation of cd16+ monocytes (supplementary fig 3g).as expected the vast majority of peripheral blood cd16+ cells were most similar to the cm0 cluster with a few cells mapped to either cm1 or cm3 and no cell mapped to cm4 or cm2 (supplementary fig 3h).to determine whether the hypothesized differentiation begins before entering the kidney we examined the relative upregulation of phagocytosis-associated genes in cluster cm1 compared with cm0 in both blood and kidney (supplementary fig 3i–j).]
Patterns related to cell trajectory were identified in kidney myeloid cells, showing transitions from inflammatory to phagocytic phenotypes.

Text 161
10.1038/s41590-019-0398-x
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 5 | focused analysis of kidney b cells. a, preliminary analysis identified four clusters. the heatmaps show the expression of either canonical markers defining b-cell subsets (top) or genes differentially upregulated in each cluster specifically (bottom). b, the expression of genes previously found to be differentially expressed in abcs. the top heatmap pertains to genes known to be upregulated in abcs, the bottom heatmap to genes downregulated in this subset. columns are sorted by the abc score, defined as the difference between the average expression of these two sets of genes. the bottom panel shows the abc score per cell, such that each point on the line corresponds to the heatmap column directly above it. c, cluster cb2 split into two subclusters, one corresponding to naive b cells (cb2a), the other to pdcs (cb2b). d, projection of the cells in clusters cb0, cb1 and cb2a onto a twodimensional plane, using diffusion maps. the arrow represents the hypothesized direction of transition along the trajectory from naive to activated b cells. e,f, the changes in the expression of cd27 and ighd along the trajectory shown in d. g, the change in the abc score along this trajectory. in e–g, the violin plots (shades) show the distribution of expression levels in equally spaced intervals along the pseudotime axis (and do not directly correspond to cell clusters).']. Reference sentences:[analysis of the 435 cells mapped to clusters c3 and c8 identified 4 different b-cell clusters in ln samples but almost no b cells in healthy kidneys (clusters cb0–cb3; fig 5a supplementary fig 5a and 2d and supplementary table 3).a continuous range of values of this score could be observed in cluster cb0 without a clear separation into distinct subpopulations (fig 5b).the tsne plot for the b cells suggested that cluster cb2 may contain multiple subsets (supplementary fig 5b).this analysis clas- sified all cb2b cells as pdcs using any of the three reference data sets (supplementary fig 5d–f).projecting the gene expression data of the b cells onto two dimensions using diffusion maps21 we found that the naive (cb2a) and activated (cb0) b cells formed a continuum of states demonstrating a gradual increase in cd27 expression and a parallel decrease in ighd expression reflecting activation (fig 5d–f).furthermore traversing the trajectory from cb2a to cb0 coincided with a continuous increase in the abc score (fig 5g) indicating that activation and differentiation into abcs are highly correlated processes in our data.]
The trajectory of B-cell activation from naive to activated states, reflected by changes in gene expression and ABC score.

Text 162
10.1038/s41590-019-0403-4
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 1 | heterogeneity of virus-specific cd8+ t cells from chronic lcmv infection delineated by scrna-seq. a–f, naïve p14 cd8+ t cell were transferred to c57bl/6 mice that were subsequently infected with lcmv clone 13. p14 cells were isolated on day 7 post-infection. n=2,597 cells were used for the scrna-seq analyses. a, the t-sne projection of p14 cells, determined by seurat v.2. each dot corresponds to one individual cell. a total of four clusters (clusters 0–3) were identified and color-coded. b, heatmap of the top 10 genes expressed in each cluster as defined in fig 1a. the columns correspond to the cells; the rows correspond to the genes. cells are grouped by clusters. the color scale is based on a z-score distribution from −2 (purple) to 2 (yellow). c, volcano plot showing the differentially expressed genes between cells within cluster 3 and cells outside cluster 3 (purple: upregulated in cluster 3; gray: downregulated in cluster 3). the x axis represents the log fold changes; the y axis presents the −log10 adjusted p values. a two-sided wilcoxon rank-sum test was used. d, single-cell transcript levels of tcf7, tox, gzmb, birc5 and top2a illustrated in the t-sne plots. transcript levels are color-coded: gray, not expressed; purple, expressed. e, left panel: enrichment (log2 p values) of progenitor-like gene signature in each cell, determined by a one-sided fisher’s exact test, illustrated in the violin plot. cells are separated into the four clusters defined in fig 1a. the violin represents the probability density at each value; each dot represents one cell. right panel: enrichment (log2 p values) of progenitor-like gene signature in each cell illustrated in the t-sne plots. the p values are color-coded. f, left panel: the trajectory of the p14 cells state transition in a two-dimensional state-space determined by monocle v.2. each dot represents a single cell. the colors represent the clusters to which the cells belong, as defined in fig 1a. right panel: the x axis represents the values of component 2 determined by monocle v.2; the y axis represents the log2 p values derived from the enrichment of the progenitor-like gene signature, as in fig 1e. each dot represents a single cell. the dark blue circles represent the spline.']. Reference sentences:[on day 7 post-infection splenic p14 cd8+ t cells were iso- lated (supplementary fig 1a) and analyzed by scrna-seq (10× genomics).t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding (t-sne) and unsupervised graph-based clustering partitioned cells into four clusters based on their transcriptomes18 (fig 1a and supplementary fig 1b).among the top 126 genes upregulated in cluster 3 (supplementary table 1) were tcf7 id3 and slamf6 (encoding lymphocyte antigen 108 (ly108)) known markers of progenitor- like cd8+ t cells6 (fig 1b).in addition cells in cluster 3 exhib- ited high expression of tox ikzf2 and hif1a and low expression of id2 gzma gzmb cxcr6 and lgals3 (fig 1cd and supplementary fig 1cd).almost all cells in cluster 3 showed enrichment of progenitor-like signature genes whereas few cells from other clusters showed enrichment (fig 1e).this conclusion was independently confirmed by using a published method (aucell 1.2.4)19 (supplementary fig 1e).to model the gradual changes in transcriptomes during cell dif- ferentiation we used pseudotime analysis to plot gene expression profiles along two principle components of variance20 (fig 1f left).the value of principle component 2 positively correlated with tcf7 expression (supplementary fig 1f) and enrichment of a progeni- tor-like gene signature (fig 1f right).principle component 1 probably reflects cell cycle pro- gression through the g1-s-g2m phases (supplementary fig 1g).whereas cells in clusters 0 and 3 both with high component 1 val- ues were mostly in the g1 phase cells in cluster 1 were mostly in the g2m or s phase (supplementary fig 1h).right panel: the x axis represents the values of component 2 determined by monocle v.2; the y axis represents the log2 p values derived from the enrichment of the progenitor-like gene signature as in fig 1e.]
Summary: Trajectory analysis reveals cell state transitions and enrichment of progenitor-like gene signature in clusters, indicating differentiation patterns in single cells.

Text 163
10.1038/s41591-019-0468-5
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 3 | distinct programs of epithelial cell differentiation in asthmatic versus healthy airways. a, table with overview and cell numbers for healthy control volunteers and volunteers with asthma analyzed in this figure. b, t-sne displaying all epithelial cells analyzed colored by their specific cluster assignment. c, box and whisker plots depicting cell numbers of healthly control patients and patients with asthma in each cluster. d, heat map displaying the top five differentially expressed genes per cluster. e, pseudotime developmental trajectory analysis from monocle2 depicting how each of the basal, secretory, and ciliated subsets relate to each other. f, binned pseudotime analysis displaying how each subset is ordered in a one-dimensional continuous space. g, heat map displaying the expression of asthma genes from gwas. only genes present in our list of differentially expressed genes are depicted for each cell cluster. significance analysis in c calculated using fisher’s exact test corrected for multiple comparison using the bonferroni method. significance was calculated using all the clusters present in figs. 3 and 4, which were derived from the same set of samples. p<0.001. a full list of p values is given in supplementary table 5. in box and whisker plots in c, all points are shown, and the box represents the second and third quartiles and median. all the differential expression analyses in d and g were performed using the non-parametric two-sided wilcoxon rank sum test in seurat. panels b–d and g depict the number of cells and individuals described in a; e and f depict the number of individuals described in a.']. Reference sentences:[we detected multiple basal club cili- ated and goblet cell states as well as type 1 and type 2 alveolar cells and the recently described ionocyte34 (fig 1d and extended data fig 3).we analyzed bronchial biopsies from six volunteers with chronic childhood-onset asthma (fig 3a and supplementary table 3) and compared them with bronchoscopy samples obtained from healthy sex- and age-matched volunteers (supplementary table 3).clustering of the epcam+ cells identified ten sub-clusters repre- senting the six epithelial cell types observed in healthy airway wall (fig 1c) as well as four additional cell states: mucous ciliated cells activated basal cells cycling cells and serous cells from the submu- cosal glands (fig 3b).activated basal cells closely resemble basal 1 cells but also express proinflammatory genes such as postn (fig 3d).significance was calculated using all the clusters present in fig 3 and 4 which were derived from the same set of samples.we observe mucous cell hyperplasia in asthma with a marked increase in goblet cell numbers (fig 3c) which are very rare in healthy airway wall biopsies (fig 1e).moreover the goblet cell tran- scriptional phenotype is altered in asthma with strong upregula- tion of proinflammatory and remodeling genes nos2 ceacam5 and cst1 (fig 3d).in addition we identified a strong increase in mucous ciliated cells a novel cell state highly similar to ciliated cells but co-expressing a number of mucous genes also observed in gob- let cells including muc5ac and ceacam5 and the ciliated genes foxj1 and pifo (fig 3d and extended data fig 6).this reveals a trajectory starting with basal cell subsets bifurcating into either a secretory lineage (mainly club cells) and a ciliated lineage in healthy airway wall (fig 3e).in asthma the secretory lineage is a mix of club and goblet cells while the mucous ciliated cell state is mapped to the ciliated differentia- tion trajectory (fig 3ef).similar to goblet cells mucous ciliated cells express key asthma genes such as cst125 and postn (fig 3d) indicating that these cells can contribute to airway inflam- mation and remodeling.analysis of asthma genome-wide association study (gwas) gene expression in our epithelial scrna-seq data revealed a broad contribution of airway epithelial cell types to asthma susceptibility (fig 3g) with high expression of asthma gwas genes in ciliated and mucous ciliated cells.significance was calculated using all the clusters present in fig 3 and 4 which were derived from the same set of samples.we quantified the predicted cell interactions in healthy and asthmatic airways between all the epithelial and non-epithelial cell clusters identified in fig 3 and 4 plus the lung airway-enriched populations of cd4 t cells (th2 treg tmc and trm) a networks depicting cell types as nodes and interactions as edges.we performed one round of clustering and removed one clusters with high expression of pecam1 (endothelial marker) (fig 3 and associated extended data figures).full sample distribution in fig 3b.complete sample distribution in fig 3b.complete sample distribution in fig 3b 4a and 5b.asthma biopsy epithelial cells (figure 3 and associated extended data figures): due to the smaller number of cells in addition to the general qc metrics we only performed cluster-based doublet exclusion without cell filtering.]
Patterns related to cell differentiation trajectories in healthy versus asthmatic airways were analyzed, revealing distinct cell states and altered gene expressions.

Text 164
10.1016/j.immuni.2019.05.014
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 4. identification of a trajectory for th2 cell differentiation single-cell transcriptomes across all experiments were combined into a single analysis. (a) t-sne representation of all single-cell transcriptomes.']. Reference sentences:[scorpius defined a trajectory for th2 cell differentiation between naive and day 15 th2 cells and passing through the day 10 th2 cell state (figure 4b).four mod- ules of gene expression were identified: (1) genes increased in early th2 cells and maintained including gata3 nfkb1 and members of the s100 family; (2) genes present primarily only on day 15 th2 cells including ctla2a ahnak rbpj and bhlhe40; (3) genes that were high in naive cells and maintained with reduced expression over time including pfn1 and gimap3; and (4) genes lost from naive cd4+ t cells such as lef1 and igfbp4 (figure 4c).we also performed differential gene expression analysis be- tween naive day 10 and day 15 th2 cells (table s4) and noted that il4 gene expression was considerably more prominent in day 10 th2 cells compared with day 15 bal th2 cells (figure 4d).a number of genes associated with tfh cells including il6st tox cd200 slamf6 rilpl2 and plekho1 (choi et al. 2015) were also transiently upregulated in day 10 th2 cells (figure 4d).indeed gsea suggested that day 10 th2 cells were significantly enriched for genes found in germinal center (gc) tfh cells (figure 4e).]
Summary: Identification of a trajectory for cell differentiation based on gene expression patterns across different cell states.

Text 165
10.1038/s41467-019-10596-0
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 6 transcriptional dynamics and regulatory networks within the ssc trajectory. a trajectory analysis of ssc-enriched clusters from each developmental age ordered through pseudotime. b heatmap representation of four broad gene expression patterns that vary as a function of pseudotime. associated gene ontology (go) terms and false discovery rates (fdr) are reported for each group. c–f select protein families and pathways that are differentially expressed across pseudotime corresponding to gene groups in b. dot coloring in c–f corresponds to developmental ages illustrated in a']. Reference sentences:[outcomes of trajectory analysis showed the correct ordering of developmental ages in pseudotime (fig 6a).four broad patterns of gene expression dynamics were identified (fig 6b) and analyzed further.interestingly a number of factors within the transforming growth factor β (tgfβ) and wingless-type mmtv integration site (wnt) families were enriched in group 1 (fig 6c).group 2 represented a smaller set of genes similar to group 1 but with more prolonged expression along the trajectory; these genes included a number of unique transcription factors and signaling proteins (fig 6d).group 3 encompassed genes that peaked midway during the trajectory consistent with the transition from prospermatogonia to spermatogonia; these genes included a number of transcription factors receptors and metabolic regulators (fig 6e and supplementary fig 6a).a number of unique chromatin-associated transcription factor and receptor genes were also identified in group 4 (supplementary fig 6b).for example after birth numerous transcription factors receptors and metabolic regulators are upregulated during ssc pool establishment (fig 6 group 3 genes).]
Summary: Gene expression patterns along the developmental trajectory of single cells, with distinct dynamics and regulatory networks identified.

Text 166
10.1016/j.cell.2019.05.054
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure s3. adipose tissue macrophages during obesity are derived from monocytes, related to figure 2 a. flow cytometric analysis of the frequency of tomato+ cells (ms4a3 lineage) among adipose tissue macrophages, ly6chi blood monocytes, ly6chi liver monocytes and kupffer cells from 8 week-old or 16 week-old ms4a3cre-rosa26tdtomato mice fed with nc or hfd during 8 weeks. numbers indicate percentage of gated cells, used for the analysis shown in figure 2h. b. gene expression profiles driving the molecular differentiation trajectory from monocyte toward the mac3 macrophage subset, ordered according to slingshot pseudo-time trajectory (star methods).']. Reference sentences:[]
Summary: The trajectory of molecular differentiation from monocytes to macrophages in single cells.

Text 167
10.1126/science.aax1184
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 2. hfd alters the transcriptional profile of lhavglut2 neurons. (a) signalto-noise ratio (snr) of significantly altered genes (p ≤ 0.001) within each cluster. outliers with snr > 2 are clipped for display. (b) percentages of total genes significantly altered (p ≤ 0.0001) in ≥50% of cells per cluster. (c) cumulative distribution of p values (p ≤ 0.1) for differentially expressed genes (degs) within each neuronal cluster and detected in ≥50% of cells per cluster. p < 0.0001. (d) p values for asinh fold change (fc) for all genes within the vglut2 cluster. (e) gene-level genetic association with human bmi across clusters. dashed line, bonferroni significance threshold. (f) pseudotime trajectories across control and hfd cells. (g) hfd cells are enriched at later pseudotimes (top) and show distinctive gene expression patterns (bottom, abridged from fig s4). (h) degs (p ≤ 0.001) queried against multiple annotation databases revealing altered expression in activity-dynamic–associated functional classes (see methods in the supplementary materials). in (a) to (e) and (h), degs between hfd and control cells were identified within each cluster (see methods and data s1).']. Reference sentences:[how- ever glutamatergic neurons expressing vesicu- lar glutamate transporter type-2 [vglut2 (slc17a6); lhavglut2] exhibited significant changes in the greatest proportion of genes (fig 2 a to d).con- sistently lhavglut2 neurons also contained the most significant gene-level genetic association with human body mass index (bmi) (fig 2e) sug- gesting that similar alterations within lhavglut2 neurons may contribute to human obesity.we compared differential gene expression between the most-altered (late pseudotime) and least- altered (early pseudotime) hfd cells along the entire trajectory and observed significant changes in the expression of genes associated with neu- ronal activity (fig 2 f and g fig s4b and data s2).these anno- tations were distinct from those observed in vesicular g-aminobutyric acid transporter [vgat (slc32a1)]-expressing cells or oligodendrocytes (fig 2h and data s2) (17).a subset of neurons was tracked throughout the experiment and showed similarly blunted su- crose responses after exposure to a hfd (fig 4 g and h and fig s8 e to j) confirming that rossi et al. science 364 1271–1274 (2019) 28 june 2019 2 of 4 fig 2.]
Summary: Trajectory analysis reveals altered gene expression patterns in different cell states, with specific changes in neuronal activity-related genes in response to high-fat diet.

Text 168
10.1016/j.celrep.2019.06.031
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 3. population balance analysis predicts early differentiation trajectory of adipocytes, osteoblasts, and chondrocytes (a) velocyto-calculated rna velocity vector field overlaid on a spring plot. (b) prediction of start and end cell states using rna velocity-based markov process simulation. (c) pba-predicted differentiation trajectories for each stromal lineage. colors indicate the ordering of cells from least (black) to most (red) differentiated, with gray cells excluded from the ordering. (d) heatmaps of dynamically varying genes for each lineage, with cells ordered from least to most differentiated and genes ordered by the clustering of expression patterns. gene expression was smoothed using a gaussian kernel along the cell ordering axis. (e) clustering of gene expression traces for significantly variable genes along the pba-predicted osteoblast differentiation ordering. z score normalized, gaussian-smoothed expression traces were clustered using k-means clustering. individual gene traces are shown in black, and the average cluster trace is shown in red.']. Reference sentences:[mscs are believed to give rise to bone fat and cartilage and this was supported by the application of velocyto (la manno et al. 2018) to our data (figure 3a).velocyto identified mscs as the strongest ‘‘source’’ cell state in our dataset with pre- adipocytes pro-osteoblasts and pro-chondrocytes serving as likely end states (figure 3b).we then used population balance analysis (pba) (weinreb et al. 2018b) to predict the average gene expression trajectory of cells as they differentiate from mscs toward these end states (figure 3c) and clustered genes based on their expression patterns along the differentiation tra- jectory of each lineage (figure 3d).osteogenic genes were upregulated in multiple waves (figure 3e) with early activation of a subset of genes (e.g. sp7) followed by the induction of others (e.g. creb3l3) in pro-osteoblasts.the surface marker-defined populations were present in the expected tdtom+ lineages: pan-stroma prrx1-cre-tdtom+ cells were observed in all of the marker-based populations; osx-cre- tdtom+ cells were present in msc osteoblastic and chondro- cytic ﬂuorescence-activated cell sorting (facs) gates; and adipoq-cre and tdtom+ cells were restricted to the msc and e adipocyte chondrocyte osteoblast 0 20 40 60 80 100 cell ordering (%) c dmp1 col1a1 wif1 bglap cd44 alpl spp1 sp7 mmp13 cxcl12 kitl lpl cebpb ccl2 ccl7 foxc1 n orm.expresois n 0 max cell ordering (%) cell ordering (%) cell ordering (%) 0 100 50 0 100 50 0 100 50 d adipocyte msc osteoblast msc chondrocyte msc a rna velocity b pba differentiation trajectories start points end points msc ad ch os low high density figure 3.]
Summary: Prediction of differentiation trajectories for stromal lineages based on gene expression patterns along the differentiation process.

Text 169
10.1038/s41586-019-1385-y
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 2 | transcriptome trajectories for defined individual neurons. reconstructed expression lineage for the entire nervous system. top, cells are coloured by developmental stage, and the a-lineage, b-lineage and a-lineage branches of the central nervous system and peripheral nervous system (pns) are identified. cells are ordered by pseudotime along each trajectory. bottom, dot plot of the top three most-highly expressed regulatory genes in each neural subcluster at the larval stage. dot size represents the percentage of cells that express the transcription factor, and the dot colour shows the averaged level of expression. aatens, anterior apical trunk epidermal neurons; anb, anterior neural boundary; asv, anterior sensory vesicle; btns, bipolar tail neurons; cesns, caudal epidermal sensory neurons; mhb, midbrain–hindbrain boundary; patens, posterior apical trunk epidermal neurons; rtens, rostral trunk epidermal neurons; sv, sensory vesicle. letters in parentheses denote lineages.']. Reference sentences:[t-distributed stochastic neighbour-embedding (t-sne) projections of the transcriptomes at all ten stages of development identified coherent clusters of individual tissues including heart tail muscles endoderm notochord germ cells epidermis nervous system and mesenchyme (extended data fig 2a–l).several tissues—such as the nervous system and mesenchyme—exhibit a progressive increase in cell complexity during development (extended data fig 2c–l) which results in the appearance of more cell clusters at later stages of embryogenesis.the specific and stable expression of cell-specific marker genes (extended data fig 2m supplementary table 2) such as brachyury for the developing notochord and twist-like-2 for the mesenchyme1011 facilitated the reconstruction of temporal profiles for different tissues.a total of 41 neural derivatives were identified in swimming tadpoles (fig 2 extended data fig 6d).distinctive combinations of regulatory genes were identified in the neu- ral subtypes (fig 2 extended data fig 6e supplementary table 2).transcriptome trajectories of eminens neurons suggest that they arise from the a-lineage (fig 2) even though they are located in the posterior regions of the sensory vesicle.for t-sne visualization of the whole dataset (as shown in fig 1b extended data fig 2a b) the shared highly variable genes (500 genes) among all of the samples were kept for canonical correlation analysis.article research extended data fig 2 | t-sne projections of ten stages from single-cell rna-sequencing data.]
Summary: Trajectory patterns of neural subtypes along developmental stages, with distinct regulatory gene expressions in different neural clusters.

Text 170
10.1186/s13059-019-1739-7
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 6 monocle analysis of the np, n, and cr cluster. a consistent with the subgroup assignment by cellsius, monocle orders cells on a trajectory from np via immature neurons (n_early) to either mature n or cr cells. b gene expression along pseudotime. shown is a marker for nps (vim), immature neurons (nhlh1), n.sub_2 (fezf2), and cr cells (reln)']. Reference sentences:[this analysis revealed a tree with two branches (fig 6a).along the trajectory the np marker vim decreases gradually whereas nhlh1 increases up to the branch point then decreases again (fig 6b).the cr branch ends with cells expressing high levels of reln and the n branch is characterized by gradual increase of fezf2 expression and ending in the n.sub_1 population (fig 6b).]
Summary: Trajectory analysis shows a progression from one cell type to another, with specific gene expressions changing along the path.

Text 171
10.1038/s41586-019-1404-z
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 2 | pseudotime trajectory analysis of upper-layer ens. a, trajectory analysis of cux2-expressing l2–l3 ens (top left). unsupervised pseudotime trajectories within the l2–l3 en cluster (top right) reflect cellular origin from ms samples or controls (bottom left) and inflammatory lesion stage (bottom right). acute, acute chronic-active; chronic, chronic inactive. b, l2–l3 en pseudotime trajectories showed similar features as in a and suggested loss of normalized l2–l3 en numbers (bottom left). the strongest association with l2–l3 en trajectories was found for upper-cortical-layer demyelination (top right) versus deep-cortical-layer (middle right) and subcortical demyelination (bottom right). c, note selective enrichment of dysregulated genes in']. Reference sentences:[as shown in fig 2a the cell distribution along the trajectory separated control from ms specimens in l2–l3 ens.of note progression along the trajectory correlated with conventional inflammatory lesion staging and the degree of upper-layer cortical demyelination (fig 2b extended data fig 1c d).for example cux2-expressing neurons which localized towards the trajectory end derived predominantly from samples harbouring late chronic inactive lesions with extensive subpial demyelination versus lesions with less upper cortical demyelination (fig 2c).trajectory analysis highlighted gene ontology (go) terms and dynamic upregulation of oxidative stress mitochondrial dysfunction and cell death pathways in l2–l3 ens including faim2 atf4 clu and b2m (cell stress/death) hsph1 and hsp90aa1 (heat-shock response) app nefl and ubb (protein accumulation axon degra- dation) cox7c pkm and ppia (energy metabolism oxidative stress) and long-noncoding (lnc)rnas linc00657 (also known as norad) and bcyrn1 (also known as bc200)1718 (fig 2d e extended data fig 2a supplementary table 5).conversely we noted dynamic downregulation of transcripts associated with mitochondrial energy consumption (fars2) glutamate signalling (gria4 and grm5) potassium or cation homeostasis (kcnb2 kcnn2 and slc22a10) neuronal signalling (nell1) axon plasticity (robo1) and lncrna linc01266 (fig 2f).neurons from all cortical layers in ms showed enrichment of cell stress pathways compared to controls (extended data fig 2b supplementary table 6).we next used smfish to validate upregulation of cell stress markers including ppia (encoding prolyl isomerase cyclophilin a extended data fig 2a) in ms l2–l3 and l4 ens.we confirmed upregulation of norad in l2–l3 and l4 ens (extended data fig 2a) by chromogenic and fluorescent smfish and observed cytoplasmic norad accumulation in ms lesions relative to normal-appearing areas with intact myelin (fig 3g).article research extended data fig 2 | molecular changes in cortical neuron subtypes in ms lesions.]
Summary: Trajectory analysis reveals cell distribution patterns related to disease progression and gene expression changes in single cells.

Text 172
10.1038/s41467-019-11036-9
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 7 divergent populations of theca cells in different follicles. a tsne cluster map showing expression of selected theca cells (tc) genes. red dashed lines give the boundaries of the expression. b tsne cluster map revealing sub-clusters of cl5 representing ovarian tc types. black dashed lines give the boundaries of several sub-clusters of tc: common progenitor tc (ptc), externa tc (extc), and interna tc (intc). c expression of marker genes in subclusters of cl5. d, e analysis of cell trajectories of tc (cl5) by monocle a and diffusion maps b. individual cells (dots) are colored by cluster, follicle, patient, and pseudotime (monocle). f immunostaining of follicles (ø, diameter) growing (top two rows) and atretic (bottom two rows) for star, acta2, and zp3. inset shows mural gc of the same follicle with same magnification. single channel images were converted to an intensity map. white dotted line marks the basement membrane. scale bars are 100 μm']. Reference sentences:[tc from (healthy) follicles such as follicles a b and c were mainly clustered in cl5 (fig 4a) characterized by expression of known markers pth1 apod apoc1 and several genes not earlier associated with tc such as wfdc1 matn2 colec11 (fig 7a).to explore differences between these domains inside cl5 we calculated a separate tsne using only cl5 cells to further characterize the sub-populations of tc (fig 7b).combining differential gene expression of the obtained tc sub-clusters (fig 7c; supplementary data 5) with cell trajectory analysis using two independent methods (monocle 3 alpha and diffusion maps) (fig 7d e) we concluded that tc from the small follicles correspond to common progenitor tc (ptc) that progress to interna tc (intc) and externa tc (extc) from selectable follicles.similarly cl-t2 and cl-t4 showed a profile of extc but cells in cl-t2 also showed more pronounced expression of stress-related markers (such as fos jun) (fig 7c).in monocle we obtained ptc → stressed ptc + ptc → intc → extc → stressed extc (fig 7d).by contrast in the diffusion maps the two population of stressed tc (cl-t0 and cl-t2) were in the same trajectory and we observed ptc → stressed ptc → stressed extc + ptc → intc → extc (fig 7d).immunostaining for star and acta2 was sufficient to distinguish intc from extc in growing follicles (fig 7f top two rows).in atretic follicles star expression remained in tc whereas acta2 became more restricted to smooth muscle cells (fig 7f bottom two rows).]
Summary: Trajectory analysis reveals differentiation from common progenitor to interna and externa theca cells in follicles, with stress-related markers in some subclusters.

Text 173
10.1038/s41467-019-11036-9
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 6 cell trajectory analysis and characterization of granulosa cells. a, b analysis of cell trajectories of granulosa cells (gc) (cl3, cl8, cl11, cl15) by monocle a and diffusion maps b. individual cells (dots) are colored by cluster, follicle, patient, and pseudotime (monocle). c tsne cluster map showing selected genes expressed by gc. red dashed lines give the boundaries of the gc-clusters. d immunostaining of follicles (ø, diameter) growing (top two rows) and atretic (bottom two rows) for tnni3, amh, and ddx4. higher magnification of inner and basement gc is shown on the right side. single channel images for tnni3 converted to an intensity map are shown. white arrowheads depict basement gc, yellow arrowheads depict inner gc. scale bars are 100 μm']. Reference sentences:[pseudotime analysis using monocle 3 alpha that places the progenitor cell population in the middle of a longer trajectory segment revealed that pgc (cl15) branched to mural gc (cl11) and mature cumulus gc (cl8 and cl3) (fig 6a).the cell trajectories obtained by monocle 3 alpha were consistent with the cell trajectories obtained using diffusion maps (fig 6b).several genes not earlier associated with gc include tnni3 maged2 spint2 pla2g16 bex1 dsp tspan6 and lcmt1 (fig 6c).this may be important for regulating gc shape and function: tnni3 formed a characteristic ring-shaped structure in inner gc but was distributed to the baso-lateral cell membrane of the gc on the basement membrane (fig 6d).]
Summary: Trajectory analysis reveals cell transitions from progenitor to mature granulosa cells, with distinct gene expressions and spatial patterns in follicles.

Text 174
10.1016/j.immuni.2019.06.017
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 3. functional treg cells facilitate the development of an m2-like tam phenotype (a) pseudo-time trajectory visualization of the temporal order for the monocyte- and macrophage-derived clusters. genes driving the different developmental trajectory at branch 1 and branch 2 were shown.']. Reference sentences:[d12 d18 0 4 8 12 16 d12 d18 0.0 1.0 2.0 3.0 4.0 ratio (m1/m2) dump(cd4/cd8/ cd49b/siglec-f) mhcii ly6c f4/80 ssc-a cd45 live/dead fsc-a ly6c ly6g cd11b f4/80 neutrophils monocytes m2-like m1-like tams 2_tams-m1 3_monocytes 10_tams-m2_arg1 6_tams-m2_c1qa cluster 10 14 18 10 14 18 0.0 5.0 10.0 15.0 days post injection (b16) % in cd45+ cells figure 3.pseudotime trajectory analysis further supported the distinct differentiation or activation stages of these intratu- moral monocyte and macrophage subpopulations character- ized by a cell fate choice starting from sc-3 (monocytes) followed by an m1-like potentially plastic transitional or terminal phase (sc-2) and two ‘‘terminal’’ m2-like fates identified by their expression of arg1 and spp1 (sc-10) or complement protein family members (sc-6) (figure 3a).a gating scheme combining the commonly applied macrophage lineage markers (cd11b+ly6g–ly6c–siglec-f–f4/80+) and major his- tocompatibility complex (mhc) class ii was used to stratify between m1-like (enriched for mhc class ii family genes) and m2-like tam subsets revealed by the scrna-seq data (figure 3b).in contrast the frequency and number of mhc class iihigh m1- like tams did not differ between the two groups until d18 when it was much higher in nrp1l/lfoxp3cre-yfp tumors (fig- ures 3c and 3d) resulting in a ratio favoring m1-like tams at both time points (figure 3e).high-dimensional ﬂow cytom- etry analysis further validated our results in which wild- type treg cells promoted mhc class ii–cd206hicx3cr1+ (tams_c5) and mhc class ii–cx3cr1+ (tams_c6) tam phe- notypes in progressive tumors whereas they were reduced in the tme with nrp1–/– treg cells (figure 3f).this was accompanied by a reciprocal induction of m1-like features such as a higher expression of inducible nitric oxide synthase (inos) and proinﬂammatory cytokines such as tnfa and il1b (figure 3g; figure s3c).]
Developmental trajectory patterns of monocyte- and macrophage-derived clusters, with distinct differentiation stages and terminal m2-like fates.

Text 175
10.1038/s41586-019-1414-x
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 4 | loss of hand2 disrupts oft myocardial cell specification and rv myocardial cell differentiation and migration. a–d, pseudotime trajectory of ahf, oft and rv cells at e8.25 coloured by cluster identity (a), genotype (b) and cell state (c). n = 2 biologically independent embryos per genotype. numbers in b indicate absolute number of cells of each genotype in each cell state. d, proportion of cells per genotype in each state, indicated by percentages in b. e, expression of cck and irx4 by in situ hybridization in right lateral view to localize rv cells at e8.5 and corresponding fluorescence image for cck or irx4 expression alone. n = 2 independent experiments with similar results. scale bars, 200 μm. f, expression of sema3c to localize ahf cells and derivatives at e8.5 in right lateral view. n = 3 independent experiments with similar results. scale bars, 200 μm. rvp, right ventricle progenitors.']. Reference sentences:[three subpopulations of the endothelial or endocardial lin- eage emerged: haematoendothelial progenitors specified endothelial or endocardial cells and endocardial cells initiating an endotheli- al-to-mesenchymal transition program typical of valve development (extended data fig 4a b).the isl1+ multipotent progenitor population segregated into the anterior and posterior domains of the shf (the anterior heart field (ahf) and posterior shf (pshf) respectively) and the branchiomeric muscle progenitors that share a common ori- gin with shf cells in the cardiopharyngeal mesoderm (extended data fig 4c d).to test the prediction that hand2 specifies oft cells we ordered wild-type and hand2-null ahf oft and rv cells captured at e8.25 in pseudotime (fig 4a–c).hand2-null cells were severely depleted in the oft state and whereas rv state 1 comprised both wild-type and hand2-null cells in compa- rable numbers wild-type cells predominated in rv state 2 (fig 4b d).in situ hybridization demonstrated that irx4+cck+ rv cells were present in hand2-null embryos but were located in the ahf area behind the lv at e8.5 and in the area of the oft at e9.25 (fig 4e extended data fig 10a b).a ventral view of tdgf1 and tnnt2 expression in the cardiac crescent (cc) right lateral views of wnt5a and bmp4 in the oft mab21l2 and shox2 in the sv and hoxa1 and hoxb1 in the pshf by in situ hybridization at the indicated embryonic stages which informed assignment of population identities in extended data fig 4c 5a.letter research extended data fig 4 | heterogeneity in endocardium or endothelium and multipotent progenitor populations.a violin plots showing expression of nppa and nppb in rv states 1 and 2 from fig 4c.c quantification of sema3c fluorescence signal in fig 4f.]
Summary: Trajectory analysis reveals differentiation and migration patterns of cells in different states during heart development.

Text 176
10.1038/s41586-019-1414-x
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 8d). by contrast, wild-type and hand2-null rv cells had equivalent expression levels of irx4 at e7.75, suggesting that loss of hand2 did not prevent acquisition of ventricular identity (fig 3e). however, markers of differentiation towards mature myocardium were downregulated in hand2-null rv cells at e8.25, indicating that these cells were in fact dysregulated after specification (extended data fig 8h). to test the prediction that hand2 specifies oft cells, we ordered wild-type and hand2-null ahf, oft and rv cells captured at e8.25 in pseudotime (fig 4a–c). the resulting trajectory began with ahf cells and split into three cell states: an oft state and two distinct rv states. hand2-null cells were severely depleted in the oft state, and whereas']. Reference sentences:[]
Summary: Trajectory analysis reveals differentiation patterns from progenitor cells to distinct cell states, with hand2-null cells showing dysregulation in myocardial differentiation.

Text 177
10.1126/science.aav9314
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 4. subtrajectory analyses of interstitial cell types. (a) interstitial gene modules successively expressed in nematocytes forming a stenotele (ic, interstitial gene module). (b) model for gland cell (zmg/gmgc) location-dependent changes. gland cells integrated into the endodermal epithelium get displaced toward the extremities and undergo changes in expression and morphology. bars show known expression domains for genes depicted in (c). gmgc, granular mucous gland cell; hyp, hypostome; tent, tentacle; zmg, zymogen gland cell. (c) urd linear zmg/gmgc trajectory recapitulates known positiondependent gene expression in gland cells along the body column.']. Reference sentences:[in addition we annotated the differen- tiation trajectories of nematoblasts and iden- tified gene modules that are expressed as they produce these two types of nematocytes (fig 3 a and d fig 4a and fig s23 to s25).zymogen gland cells (zmgs) are found throughout the body and transdifferentiate into granular mucous gland cells (gmgcs) when they are displaced into the head (fig 4b).both of these cell types exhibit location-dependent changes in gene expression and we captured these by building linear tra- jectories along the oral-aboral axis (fig 4c and fig s14 and s27).we performed in situ hybridizations for two genes (hyfem-1 hyfem- 2) expressed in a subset of cells found in the early female germline cluster and found positive cells scattered throughout the body column which we hypothesize are gscs (fig 4 e to h and fig s30 g to n).several recent studies have similarly demonstrated the value of con- ducting whole-animal (20–22) or whole-embryo scrna-seq (20 24 37–39) to uncover cell type diversity and the regulatory programs that drive siebert et al. science 365 eaav9314 (2019) 26 july 2019 5 of 8 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 pseudotime expression d oral aboral −50 −25 0 25 50 −50 −25 0 25 50 tsne_1 tsne_2 hyfem-2 f h 500µm a g b female germline 1 hydkk1/2/4c hytsr1matrilysinchia hydkk1/2/4a expression 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 pseudotime hypostome foot gmgc/ head zmg2 zmg1 gmgc/ hyp tent hypostome foot ic7 ic48 ic31 ic70 c e stenotele 100µm 20µm hywnt3 hywnt1 hybra1 ndf1 etv1 hybra2 hyfem-2 female germline 2 nurse cell fig 4.]
Summary: Trajectories of gland cell differentiation and gene expression changes along the body axis are depicted in the figure.

Text 178
10.1126/science.aav9314
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figs. s14 and s27). we hypothesized that spumous mucous gland cells (smgcs), a separate type of gland cells present in the head, may exhibit similar location-dependent gene expression profiles that were previously unappreciated. indeed, reconstruction of a linear trajectory uncovered oral-aboral organization of gene expression in this cell type, including several oral organizer genes (such as hywnt1, hywnt3, hybra1, and hybra2) in the orally located smgcs (fig 4d and figs. s14 and s28). this raises the possibility that these cells participate in patterning the head. overall, our analysis reveals a broad range of gland cell states in hydra that can be achieved through multiple paths. finally, we explored the germ cell clusters recovered in the dataset. we excluded germline cells from the interstitial lineage tree reconstruction because differentiation of gscs from iscs does not typically occur in a homeostatic animal (11); thus, we did not expect to observe transition states linking iscs to gscs. however, we did elucidate the spermatogenesis trajectory by analyzing the progression of cell states found in the two male germline clusters that were recovered in the subclustering of interstitial cells and used these data to identify and confirm several new male germline genes (figs. s14, s29, and s30). we identified two female germ cell clusters, which likely correspond to early and late female germ cell development (fig 3a). we performed in situ hybridizations for two genes (hyfem-1, hyfem2) expressed in a subset of cells found in the early female germline cluster and found positive cells scattered throughout the body column, which we hypothesize are gscs (fig 4, e to h, and fig s30, g to n). if so, this would be the first report of gene expression in hydra that is specific to gscs and would allow for the study of gscs in hydra through the construction of gsc reporter transgenic lines.']. Reference sentences:[]
Summary: Identification of oral-aboral gene expression trajectory in gland cells, revealing potential involvement in head patterning and diverse cell states in Hydra.

Text 179
10.1126/science.aav9314
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 3. trajectory reconstruction for cells of the interstitial lineage suggests a cell state common to neurogenesis and gland cell differentiation. (a) t-sne representation of interstitial cells with clusters labeled by cell state. solid arrow, neurogenesis/gland cell differentiation; dashed arrow, nematogenesis. (b) hvsoxc expression in progenitor cells. arrow indicates putative isc population, which is negative for hvsoxc. (c) the same putative isc population as in (b) is positive for biomarker hy-icell1 expression. (d) urd differentiation tree of the interstitial lineage. colors represent urd segments and do not correspond to the colors in the t-sne (see fig s19). (e) myb (green) is expressed in the neuron/gland cell progenitor state and during early neurogenesis/ gland cell differentiation. expression of myb (green, >0) partially overlaps with high expression of the neuronal gene nda-1 (magenta, >3) and the gland cell gene coma (t2163) (magenta, >0); coma is also expressed in a subset of endodermal neurons. coexpressing cells are black. star and']. Reference sentences:[identification of multipotent interstitial stem cells and trajectory reconstruction of the interstitial lineage we extracted 12470 interstitial cells from the whole dataset (fig 1e and fig s10d) performed subclustering and annotated the clusters through the expression of known and new markers (fig 3a and fig s18).the t-sne representation of in- terstitial cells showed evidence for isc differen- tiation (fig 3a and fig s18 a to h).hvsoxc (25) was found to be expressed in transition states between candidate iscs and differentiated neu- rons and nematoblasts which suggests that the expression of this gene marks cells undergoing differentiation (fig 3b and fig s20).we attempted to identify transcripts specific to the putative isc population and found only a single marker with no shared similarities to known proteins (fig 3c and fig s21a).the urd reconstruction recovered a branching tree of interstitial stem cell differentiation that resolves neurogenesis nematogenesis and gland cell differentiation (fig 3d).we performed double fluorescence in situ hybridization (fish) to vali- date predicted transition states (fig 3 e and f and fig s20 to s22).the trajectory analysis of the interstitial lineage suggests that neuron and gland cell differenti- ation transit through a previously undescribed shared cell state (fig 3d) whereas nematogenesis is distinct.to test this result we identified genes that are expressed in the progenitor state common to neural and gland cell differentiation including myc3 (t18095) (26) and myb (t27424) (fig 3 d siebert et al. science 365 eaav9314 (2019) 26 july 2019 2 of 8 fig 1.we identified the spatial location of myb-positive cells using fish and found positive cells in both the endodermal and ectodermal layers (fig 3f and fig s22).a subset of myb-positive cells coexpress the neuronal marker nda-1 (27) consistent with myb-positive cells giving rise to neurons in both epithelial layers (fig 3 e and f and fig s22).furthermore we found endodermal myb-positive cells that coex- press coma (t2163) a gene expressed during gland cell differentiation and in all gland cell states (fig 3 e and f and fig s21e and s22).the data suggest the existence of two myb-positive progenitor pop- ulations: one that stays in the ectoderm to give rise to neurons and another that crosses the mesoglea to the endodermal layer and subsequent- ly gives rise to endodermal neurons and gland cells (fig 3g).we identified one cluster of differ- entiated nematocytes which contains nematocytes that harbor either desmonemes or stenoteles (fig 3a cluster “nematocyte” and fig s24 a to f).in addition we annotated the differen- tiation trajectories of nematoblasts and iden- tified gene modules that are expressed as they produce these two types of nematocytes (fig 3 a and d fig 4a and fig s23 to s25).we were able to capture isc differen- tiation into gland cells in the trajectory anal- ysis (fig 3d and fig s26).we identified two female germ cell clusters which likely correspond to early and late female germ cell development (fig 3a).for 25 of the 39 metagenes with enriched binding motifs we found one or multiple candidate transcrip- tion factors with putative function in cell fate siebert et al. science 365 eaav9314 (2019) 26 july 2019 4 of 8 −50 −25 0 25 50 −50 −25 0 25 50 tsne_1 tsne_2 nb2 male germline 1 female germline 1 female germline 2 nurse cell granular mgc (head) male germline 2 nb1 nb3 nb4 nb5 nb6 nb7 nb8 n_prog n_prog/ neuron ec1a neuron ec3 neuron en2 neuron ec1b n/gc_prog nematocyte isc/nb isc/prog smgc1 smgc2 zymogen gc 1 zymogen gc 2 granular mgc (hyp) neuron en3 neuron en1 neuron ec5 neuron ec2 neuron ec4 −50 −25 0 25 50 −50 −25 0 25 50 tsne_1 tsne_2 b c d nematogenesis neurogenesis gland cells nematobl 6 nematobl 8 nematobl 7 nematobl 5 neuron ec1b neuron ec1a neuron ec3 neuron en3 neuron en2 neuron ec4 neuron ec5 neuron ec2 neuron en1 gmgc hyp zmg 1 zmg 2 smgc 1 smgc 2 pseudotime hvsoxc gland stenotele desmoneme myb (t27424) - nda-1 (t5467) isc myb+ myb+/ nda+ nda-1+ (coma+) myb+ myb+/ coma+ myb+ myb+/ nda+/ (coma+) coma+ endoderm ectoderm myb (t27424) - coma (t2163) neuro gland e f g nda-1+ mesoglea ect end n p ect end n p np myb/coma myb/nda-1 myb/nda-1 myb/nda-1 np endoderm ectoderm n p myb/nda-1 20µm myb/nda-1 gp gc −50 −25 0 25 50 −50 −25 0 25 50 tsne_1 tsne_2 neuro hy-icell1 (t27659) a fig 3.second our data suggest the existence of a cell state that is shared by the neuron and gland cell trajectory (fig 3d).this interpretation is supported by the colocalization of neural and gland cell pro- genitors in several independent clustering analy- ses (fig 1f fig 3a and fig s31) that consider different sets of variable genes and sets of cells and by the overlap of gene modules for neuro- genesis and gland cell differentiation (fig s42).additionally our data suggest a model in which a bipotential gland/neuron progenitor born in the ectodermal layer where multipotent iscs reside traverses the extracellular matrix to pro- vide the endodermal layer with both gland cells and neurons (fig 3g).]
Summary: Trajectory reconstruction reveals a shared cell state for neuron and gland cell differentiation, supported by gene expression patterns and lineage analysis.

Text 180
10.1126/science.aav9314
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 2. identification of genes with differential expression along the oral-aboral axis. (a and b) t-sne representation of subclustered endodermal epithelial cells (a) and subclustered ectodermal epithelial cells (b). (c and d) epithelial cells were ordered using urd to reconstruct a trajectory where pseudotime represents spatial position. scaled and log-transformed expression is visualized. (c) trajectory plots for previously uncharacterized putative signaling genes expressed in ectodermal epithelial cells of foot and tentacles. genes: bmp antagonist chrd (t35005), fgf1 (t12060), and wnt antagonists dkk3 (t10953), sfrp3 (t19036), and apcd1 (t11061). (d) trajectory plots for genes expressed in a graded manner in endodermal epithelial cells. genes: bmp antagonist “dan domain– containing gene” t2758, secreted wnt antagonist fzd8 (t15331), fgf receptor fgrl1 (t14481), homeobox protein hxb1 (t1602). (e to m) epithelial expression patterns obtained using rna in situ hybridization consistent with predicted patterns. whole mounts and selected close-ups are shown. arrowheads indicate ectodermal signal. t, tentacle; bd, basal disk. scale bars: whole mounts [including (g)], 500 mm; close-ups, 100 mm.']. Reference sentences:[to validate these differentiation trajectories we visualized the spatial expression of several previously characterized genes and validated the expression of several uncharacter- ized genes by rna in situ hybridization (fig 2 c to m and fig s11 to s13).these spatially and temporally resolved gene expression profiles for body column epithelial cells provide access to putative regulators of epithelial cell terminal dif- ferentiation at the oral and aboral ends such as transcription factors and signaling molecules (fig 2 and fig s12 and s15).for example we find differential expression along the body axis of previously uncharacterized genes in the wnt bmp (bone morphogenetic protein) and fgf (fibroblast growth factor) signaling pathways (fig 2).identification of putative transcriptional regulators of cell state–specific regulatory modules the construction of differentiation trajectories allows us to determine the spatial and temporal expression patterns of transcription factors and thus gain insight into the gene regulatory siebert et al. science 365 eaav9314 (2019) 26 july 2019 3 of 8 fgf1 bd chrd bd t sfrp3 −25 0 25 −40 −20 0 20 tsne_1 tsne_2 foot hypostome/body column head tentacle a −20 0 20 40 −20 0 20 40 tsne_1 tsne_2 body column peduncle basal disk hypostome/ head tentacle/ battery cell b apcd1 fgrl1 dan (t2758) fzd8 hxb1 basal disc body column hypostome c tentacle apcd1 (t11061) sfrp3 (t19036) dkk3 (t10953) fgf1 (t12060) chrd (t35005) 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 0 1 2 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 expression e f g h i j k l m dkk3 bd bd bud bud d foot/body hypostome tentacle hxb1 (t1602) fgrl1 (t14481) fzd8 (t15331) dan domain containing (t2758) 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 0 1 2 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 expression pseudotime head foot pseudotime head foot fig 2.]
Summary: Identification of genes with differential expression along a spatial trajectory in epithelial cells, revealing putative regulators of cell differentiation.

Text 181
10.1016/j.celrep.2019.06.092
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 5. pseudo-temporal ordering and grn analysis uncover critical transcriptional regulators potentially governing cell state transitions during the development of vsmcs (a) loss of myocardial marker expression and gain of vsmc marker expression during myocardial-to-vsmc trans-differentiation. black circle, vsmc marker; black triangle, myocardial marker. (b) expression of genes in the notch signaling is positively correlated with the trajectory of myocardial-to-vsmc trans-differentiation. (c) critical transcriptional regulators potentially involved in myocardial-to-vsmc trans-differentiation. see also tables s4 and s5. (d) loss of mesenchymal marker expression and gain of vsmc marker expression during c8 mesenchymal-to-vsmc transition. black circle, vsmc marker; black star, mesenchymal marker. (e) expression of genes in the notch signaling is positively correlated with the trajectory of c8 mesenchymal-to-vsmc transition. (f) critical transcriptional regulators potentially involved in c8 mesenchymal-to-vsmc transition. see also table s4 and figure s5.']. Reference sentences:[for myocardial-to-vsmc trans-differentiation (c9-c4-c3) we identified genes significantly correlated with the trajectory (table s4) and observed the loss of myocardial marker expression and gain of vsmc marker expression during the pro- gression of trans-differentiation (figure 5a).strikingly the expression of genes in the notch signaling pathway including receptor (notch1) ligand (jag1) and downstream targets (hey1 hey2 heyl and pdgfrb) was positively correlated with the trajectory (figure 5b).furthermore by gene regulatory network (grn) analysis we obtained a set of key regulators acti- vated sequentially along the trajectory and potentially drove the process (figure 5c).for mesenchymal (the c8 penk+ subpopulation)-to-vsmc transition (c8-c4-c3) we identified genes that were significantly correlated with the trajectory (table s4) and observed the loss of mesenchymal marker expression and gain of vsmc marker expression during the progression of the transition (figure 5d).the expression of genes in the notch signaling pathway was positively correlated with the trajectory (figure 5e).interestingly we found heyl and tbx20 also ranked at the top of the key reg- ulators (figure 5f).this observation is in line with our figure 5.]
Patterns of marker expression changes and notch signaling activation along trajectories of cell state transitions in single-cell data.

Text 182
10.1016/j.immuni.2019.06.027
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 3. single-cell trajectories of human lecs predict differentiation of one lec subset into the specialized lec subtypes lining the scs floor and the valve (a) single-cell trajectories of human lec subsets by trajectory space analysis with imputation. expression of differentially expressed genes between lec subsets in an axln are mapped to the trajectory plot. data are representative of two experiments in which two axlns were analyzed independently. (b and c) sub-clustering of lec v (valve). lec v cluster from six human lns were sub-clustered. (b) umap plot of lec v sub-clusters and violin plot of cx43 and cx37. (c) heatmap of single-cell expression of the differentially expressed genes in lec v sub-clusters. (d) gene ontology (go) annotation enrichment analysis of gene modules of lec i-vi. differentially expressed genes between lec subsets were calculated using six human lns. see also figure s4.']. Reference sentences:[trajectory analysis of prox1+ lecs with imputation by markov affinity-based graph imputation of cells (magic) (van dijk et al. 2018) showed that lecs have two major branches 1 and 2 which are connected by an ackr4 and cav1-express- ing cluster (lec i [scs ceiling]) (figure 3a).branch 1 divided into two sub-branches (figure 3a).valve 1 expressed cav1 more abundantly and valve 2 expressed angpt2 which regulates the formation and maturation of lymphatic valves (zheng et al. 2014; figure 3c).gene enrich- ment analysis showed that lec ii (scs ﬂoor) and vi (ms) expressed molecules involved in immunological defense and inﬂammation indicating that they are highly specialized in regu- lating immune responses (figure 3d).a b c d figure 3.]
Summary: Trajectory analysis reveals differentiation of lec subsets into specialized subtypes based on gene expression patterns.

Text 183
10.1073/pnas.1908180116
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 5. deviated commitment route with enhanced nonepithelial cell fates in eec-ipsc differentiation. (a) differentiation gene expression trajectories of control nipsc1 and eec-ipscs during differentiation and that of primary kcs using pseudotime (monocle) analysis. differentiation days are indicated by colors. (b) differentiation gene expression trajectories of control nipsc1 (pink) and eec-ipscs, r204w-ipscs (blue), and r304-ipscs (green) during differentiation using pseudotime (monocle) analysis, without primary kcs. differentiation days are indicated by shapes. (c) heatmap of 6 clusters of de genes detected by pseudotime analysis based on their z-scores (indicated by the color). (d) go analysis showing biological process terms enriched for de genes in each cluster. the gene ratio is indicated by the dot size and the significance by the color of the dot (red, low p value; blue, high p value). (e) correlation of the single-cell transcriptome against bulk rna-seq data of nheks and hsmms. correlation coefficient is indicated by color.']. Reference sentences:[pscs did not reach the primary kc state (fig 5a).although both eec-ipsc lines had a small number of cells moving in the pseudotime path toward primary kcs r304w-ipscs showed more subbranches and more cells at subbranches than that of r204w-ipscs suggesting more severe differentiation defects (fig 5a).when primary kc profiles were excluded in the analysis the bifurcation that oc- curred on day 7 and day 15 between control pscs and eec- ipscs became more apparent (fig 5b).the pseudotime path of differentiated r304w-ipscs and the majority of r204w- ipscs took an alternative direction (branch 2 in fig 5b) other than the path of control pscs.according to the pseudotime ordering differentially regulated genes were clustered into 6 clusters and cluster 1 and 2 genes corresponded to the bi- furcation branches 1 and 2 respectively (fig 5c).go analyses of cluster 1 genes showed that these genes were associated with epidermal development and keratinocyte differentiation whereas that of cluster 2 genes showed an enrichment of genes involved in immune response (fig 5d and dataset s7).in agreement correlation analyses to bulk rna-seq data showed that genes enriched for branch 1 cells had a higher correlation to gene signatures of epithelial nhek and hmec cells and genes enriched for branch 2 cells correlated better to hsmm and other nonepithelial cells (fig 5e and si appendix fig s6c).genes in other clusters were expressed earlier during differentiation (fig 5 b and c).although the majority of cells deviated from the route toward epidermal cells showing the importance of p63 controlling the epidermal commitment a small percentage of r204w and r304w ipscs were still on the path toward the epi- dermal fate even though their cell states were distinct from the mature epidermal fate (fig 5a).however rather than simply being blocked between the ectodermal and fully committed epidermal stage suggested by p63- deficient mouse studies (14) our single-cell transcriptome and pseudotime analyses showed that the majority of differentiated eec pscs deviated from the normal route of epidermal commitment to a more mesodermal cell identity (fig 5).]
Summary: Differentiation trajectories diverged towards epithelial and nonepithelial fates, with distinct gene clusters enriched for epidermal and immune processes.

Text 184
10.1016/j.stem.2019.07.009
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 6. episc reprogramming converges on the fine-tuning of oct4 expression (a) summary of transcriptional trajectories and mechanistic requirements for each driver. (b) scatterplots of oct4 expression in single cells versus pseudotime (figure s2c), fitted with loess regression lines. (c and d) timecourse rt-qpcr analyses of mean oct4 expression, displayed relative to gapdh and normalized to npscs ± sd (n = 3).']. Reference sentences:[a defined oct4 level is a common feature of all routes the aforementioned differences in transcriptional trajectories signal and genetic requirements demonstrate that iklf2 ipstat3 and iesrrb instruct reprogramming by distinct mecha- nisms (figure 6a).from 48–96 h in rex1::dgfp+ single cells we found that oct4 is expressed at endogenous pluripotent level irrespective of the driver (figure 6b).indeed signal switch of control episcs from fa to 2ilif triggered oct4 downregulation (figure 6c).in contrast oct4 was unperturbed in npscs upon switching from serum+lif to 2ilif (figure 6d) indicating that 2i itself did not suppress oct4 in a context where cellular identity was constant.because 2ilif triggered oct4 collapse in control episcs (figure 6c) we reason that the observed mainte- nance of oct4 in 2ilif during productive reprogramming is an active process coordinated by the driving transgene (figure 6b).reconciliation of route differences with common oct4 maintenance despite distinctions between routes in terms of their transcrip- tional trajectories and mechanistic requirements (figure 6a) oct4 maintenance is a common feature that is required and suf- ficient for reprogramming (figures 6f–6i).first we assessed the ability of each driver to rescue the drop in oct4 expression when episcs are treated with 2ilif for 24 h (figure 6j).ipstat3 also maintained oct4 expression (figure 6j).because klf2 is the most effective supporter of oct4 (figure 6j) and is an early transcriptional responder to ipstat3 (figure 5a) we asked whether these observations can be conceptually integrated.transient klf2 kd at ipstat3 reprogramming onset resulted in a 65% reduction of oct4 expression (figure 6k) and abolished ipstat3-driven reprogramming (figure 5b).this places oct4 maintenance as a functionally important downstream mecha- nism of klf2 in reprogramming likely to be direct because of its manifestation within 1 h (figure 6l).strikingly their dox-independent clonogenicity was comparable with npscs (figure 6m) indicating that 48 h post- induction a functional naive network has already formed for iesrrb.not only do these routes differ in their transcriptional trajectories but crucially also in their mech- anistic attributes of genetic and signal requirements (figure 6a).therefore initially moving backward or forward in developmental time can be compatible with suc- cessful reprogramming provided key mechanistic criteria are met (figure 6).based on this we speculate that different reprogramming drivers engage with p300 via different partners and that this might underpin their different mechanistic require- ments (figure 6a).in the first 48 h the only positive effect of iklf2 on pluripotency genes is robust support of oct4 expres- sion (figure 6).ultimately successful reprogramming routes can be thought of as different strategies that converge on the unifying required and sufficient feature of fine-tuned oct4 expression (figure 6).in our fixedoct4 system opposing but highly efficient identity transitions occur depending solely on the environment: induction of naive pluripotency in the presence of lif (figure 6) or re-entry to development in vivo (figure 7).]
Patterns related to trajectory: transcriptional trajectories and mechanistic requirements for reprogramming drivers converge on fine-tuning oct4 expression in single cells.

Text 185
10.1038/s41467-019-11493-2
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 7 inferred trajectories between pa cancer cells. pa cancer cells are plotted based on a lineage trajectory inferred from rna-seq data. a cancer cells are colored based on pseudotime inferred from cell trajectory, with pseudotime beginning in the branch on the top right and advancing as cells approach the left and bottom branches. b cells are colored by tumor of origin. c cells are colored by mapk signaling gene programme score. d cells are colored by ac-like gene programme score']. Reference sentences:[we next examined additional components of checkpoint signaling pathways including mhc i expression and expression of ligands that interact with immune checkpoint receptors other than pd1/ctla4 (supplementary fig 7a b).cells from all tumors were well-represented throughout the trajectory (fig 7b).the initial low-pseudotime cells had high mapk signaling scores and highly expressed mapk genes (fig 7c supplementary fig 11a).in contrast high-pseudotime cells had increasing expression of ac-like scores and of ac-like genes (fig 7d supplementary fig 11b).]
Summary: Cells in a single-cell trajectory show changes in gene expression related to different signaling pathways and gene programs.

Text 186
10.1681/ASN.2019040335
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 4. reconstructing the developmental trajectory of ics can find some genes that vary as a function of pseudotime. (a) monocle2generated pseudotemporal trajectory of five ic types (n=3328) imported from seurat data, colored by cell-name designation. (b) pseudotime was colored in a gradient from dark to light blue, and the start of pseudotime was indicated. (c) top six genes calculated by monocle2 were shown as dot plots displayed as expression level over pseudotime. (d) heat map for clustering the top 50 genes that vary as a function of pseudotime. the 50 genes were divided into three clusters (cluster 1, cluster 2, and cluster 3), representing the genes at the beginning stage, the transitory stage, and the end stage of developmental trajectory, respectively. fib1, fibroblast 1; myo, myofibroblast.']. Reference sentences:[at the same time we also examined the distribution of pca in all types of cells (supplemental figure 4b).we compared the average expres- sion of genes between the three samples and found a good pearson correlation between them (supplemental figure 4 d–f).we used reverse graph embedding to generate a trajectory plot including five ic populations (figure 4a).combined with pseudotime analysis (figure 4b) we can con- clude the states and relationships among these ics.the ex- pression of jun pla2g2a s100a10 s100a2 s100a4 and sh3bgrl3 demonstrated the most evident changes in pseu- dotime (figure 4c).the top 50 genes that vary as a function of pseu- dotime were clustered as shown by the heat map (figure 4d).the reliability and similarity of the mice model in studying human bladder function and whether the novel human bladder cell types exist in mouse bladders relative expression 0 5 10 15 20 pseudo-time jun pla2g2a s100a10 s100a2 s100a4 sh3bgrl3 25 100 10 1 100 30 1031 30 1031 10 1 100 10 1 100 10 1 c cluster cluster state expression 1 2 3 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 c7 il6 sfrp4 efemp1 p116 pla2g2a ccdc80 cxcl14 timp1 vcan col3a1 sparc sulf1 sh3bgrl3 s100a4 linc01133 fn1 fstl1 htra3 pcolce2 s100a10 tnxb eln clec3b aspn c1qtnf3 sema3c areg ly6d rgs5 fabp5 aqp3 rgs16 fabp4 s100a2 s100p sqstm1 hla-b cxcl8 tpm2 apod sfrp2 sfrp1 cxcl1 tfpi2 rbp1 cxcl2 jun ptgs2 sod2 4321 5 d -10 -5 component 1 0 5 7.5 5.0 2.5 component 2 0.0 -2.5 cluster myo adra2a+ ics fib1 fib2 fib3 1 a -10 pseudotime 0 5101520 -5 component 1 0 5 7.5 5.0 2.5 0.0 -2.5 component 2 2 b figure 4.supplemental figure 4.]
Summary: Gene expression patterns along a developmental trajectory of five cell types, clustered into three stages based on pseudotime.

Text 187
10.1016/j.stem.2019.08.002
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 2. oscillatory network dynamics in long-term cortical organoids (a) schematic of the organoid electrophysiological signal processing pipeline. raw mea data are analyzed as population spiking and lfp separately. synchronous network events are highlighted in yellow. (b) raster plot of network spiking activity after 1.5 and 8 months of maturation. a 3-s interval of activity over 5 channels is shown in the upper right corners. (c) cortical organoids show elevated and continuously increasing mean firing rate compared to 2d monolayer neurons (n = 8 for organoid cultures and n = 12 for 2d neurons). inset: correlation of the firing rate vector over 12 weeks of differentiation (from 8 to 20) between pairs of cultures showing reduced variability among organoid replicates. (d) temporal evolution of cortical organoid network activity. detailed definitions and further parameters are presented in figure s2. (e) time series of population spiking and lfp during network events in cortical organoid development. each overlaid trace represents a single event during the same recording session. (f) the number of subpeaks during an event is maximized and stereotypical at 6 months, developing nonlinearly and following an inverted-u trajectory. (g) network variability, measured as the coefficient of variation of the inter-event interval, increases monotonically throughout development.']. Reference sentences:[we separately analyzed sin- gle-channel and population firing characteristics derived from channel-wise spike times and the local field potential (lfp) a measure of aggregate synaptic currents and other slow ionic exchanges (buzsa´ ki et al. 2012; figure 2a).these network events were periodic (=0.05 hz) but infrequent early in development (=2 months) occurring roughly every 20 s and decayed monotonically after the initial onset (figure 2e).the inter-event interval cv consistently increased over 10 months of differentiation (figure 2g) from extremely regular latencies (cv y 0) at 2 months to irregular poisson-like (cv y 1) at 10 months.]
Patterns of network activity in cortical organoid development, including increasing firing rate, stereotypical subpeaks, and variability over time.

Text 188
10.1016/j.stem.2019.08.002
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 4. cortical organoid network dynamics mimic those of premature neonates after 28 weeks of maturation (a) representative lfp trace from cortical organoid, highlighting instances of network events (yellow). comparable events between periods of quiescence (discontinuous network dynamics) are shown in human preterm neonate eeg at 35 weeks gestational age, and a different pattern of continuous activity is observed in adult eeg. sat, spontaneous activity transient. (b) examples of analogous features in preterm neonate eeg and organoid lfp show various levels of similarity throughout development. rms, root-meansquare; 50% and 95% refer to 50th and 95th percentile of feature distribution within a recording. (c) pearson’s correlation coefficients between age and electrophysiological features (mean ± sd of bootstrapped distribution) for both organoid and premature neonates show different degrees of developmental similarity for individual features (12 total selected). for example, sats (events) per hour shows remarkable similarity over time between organoid and neonates. (d) schematic of machine learning procedure for age prediction: eeg features from 39 premature neonates (n = 567 recordings) between 25 and 38 weeks pma (post-menstrual age) were used to train and cross-validate a regularized regression model (elasticnet), optimizing for preterm neonate age prediction based on their eeg features only (top). the model was clamped after training and applied directly on organoid lfp features and control datasets, including held-out preterm neonate data, mouse primary culture, 2d ipsc culture, and human fetal brain culture. (e) model-predicted developmental time (y axis, age in weeks) follows actual weeks in culture (x axis) for organoids (orange and blue), as well as true age of heldout preterm neonate data points (black). dashed line represents unity, signifying perfect prediction. large circles on solid lines and shaded regions denote mean ± sd of prediction, respectively, and dots indicate per sample prediction (n = 8 for organoids at all time points). (f) pearson’s correlation coefficient between predicted and actual developmental time for organoid and control datasets. significant positive correlations indicate the model’s ability to capture developmental trajectory in a particular dataset.']. Reference sentences:[]
Developmental trajectory patterns in single-cell dynamics mimic premature neonate EEG, validated by machine learning age prediction.

Text 189
10.1038/s41467-019-11947-7
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 8 single-cell trajectory analysis reveals a linear nk cell developmental pathway, maturing from cd56bright to cd56dim nk cells. a, b pseudotime trajectory of bm (a) or blood (b) nk cells with pseudotime, all clusters and individual cluster demonstrated in the trajectory. c the bm trajectory was separated into five cell states by branch points a and b. d composition of the clusters within each cell state were demonstrated via pie charts. source data for are provided as a source data file. see also supplementary fig 9']. Reference sentences:[like the previous analyses conducted on the bm or blood separately we have found “cd56bright nk” “transitional nk” “active nk” “adaptive-like nk” “mature nk” and “terminal nk” clusters (supplementary fig 8a b).generally both bm and blood possessed similar heterogeneity of nk cells with the difference in composition (supplementary fig 8c d).consistent with independent analyses shown above we had more cells in the “active nk” cluster in blood than bm (supplementary fig 8c d).specific to “adaptive-like nk” cluster it was mostly composed of cells from bm (supplementary fig 8c d).in terms of maturity the blood possessed a higher per- centage of cells from the “mature nk” cluster than the bm con- sistent with more cd57+ nk cells in the blood than the bm (supplementary fig 8c d).as shown in fig 8a b both bm and blood nk cells demonstrated a relative linear pik3r1 tmem2 cd38 neat1 zfp36 dusp1 map3k8 ier2 hist2h2be btg1 rnu11 hist1h1d ptch2 hist1h1c jun hist1h1e snord3b−1 c12orf57 snord3b−2 snord3d rnu12 linc00910 snord3a tmem107 rp11-386i14.4 wdr74 es es rank (×103) rank (×103) terminal mature terminal mature il2_stat5 signaling amino acid metabolic process 0 –0.2 –0.3 –0.1 0.1 p < 0.05 0 –0.2 –0.3 –0.1 –0.4 p < 0.05 glycolysis mtorc1 signaling inflammatory response 0 –0.2 –0.4 –0.6 p < 0.01 0 –0.2 –0.4 p < 0.05 fatty acid metabolism 0 –0.2 –0.4 p < 0.01 0 –0.2 –0.3 –0.1 0.1 p < 0.05 ribosome chromosome maintenance histone methylation telomere maintenance es es es es 0 –0.2 –0.4 –0.6 p < 0.01 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0 1 2 3 4 0 1 2 3 4 0 1 2 3 4 0 1 2 3 4 0 3 4 p < 0.05 0.20 0.4 0.6 0.8 p < 0.01 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0 1 2 3 4 0 1 2 3 4 0 1 2 3 4 1 2 0 1 2 3 4 0 1 2 3 4 p < 0.05 .in the bm sample branch points a and b separated the cell trajectory into five states (fig 8c).we calculated and plotted the percentage contribution of each cluster within each state using the pie charts (fig 8d).importantly we found that state-5 cells branching out from point a was dominated by the “adaptive nk” cluster (fig 8d).this branch was heavily comprised of “active nk” cluster (fig 8d).]
Summary: Single-cell trajectory analysis reveals a linear developmental pathway from less mature to more mature cells, with distinct cell states and cluster compositions.

Text 190
10.1038/s41588-019-0489-5
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 4 | accumulation of knockout cells across spontaneous and tgf-β-driven emt trajectories identifies regulators of discrete checkpoints across the emt continuum. a,b, enrichment of knockouts whose distribution is significantly altered across pseudospace, and therefore emt progression, in our spontaneous (11,908 cells) (a) and tgf-β-driven (9,951 cells) (b) conditions. the distribution of cells expressing sgrnas against emt genes was compared to the distribution of ntc controls by using chi-square (empirically determined fdr<10%). for targets whose distribution is altered enrichment across each region was determined by calculating the odds ratio. c, percentage of e-cadherin (top panels) or vimentin (bottom panels) positive cells in mcf10a colonies exposed to mek (u0126) and pi3k (ly294002) inhibition after spontaneous (left panels) or tgf-β-driven (right panels) emt. error bars denote standard deviation from the mean (n=3, two-tailed student’s t-test). d, percentage of e-cadherin (top panels) or vimentin (bottom panels) positive cells in mcf10a colonies exposed to egfr (erlotinib), met (crizotinib), fgfr (infigratinib) and itgav (cilengitide) inhibition after spontaneous (left panels) or tgf-β-driven (right panels) emt. error bars denote standard deviation from the mean (left, spontaneous emt control/ egfri/itgavi n=7, meti/fgfri n=4 independent samples; at right: tgf-β-driven emt control n=4, egfri/meti/fgfri/itgavi n=3 independent samples, two-tailed student’s t-test). e, inferred emt regulatory network and putative regulators identified in this study. f, model depicting the mek dependent emt regulatory checkpoint created and its effects on the development of intermediate emt phenotypes.']. Reference sentences:[simulated sampling from the ends of the continuum and repeating our analysis excluded the possibility that this continuity was an artifact of trajectory analysis (supplementary fig 4).of the 40 genes tested 30 significantly shifted the pseudospatial positions of the cells when targeted via crop-seq with 11 over- lapping between conditions (fig 4ab and supplementary fig 23).for example in the spontaneous emt tra- jectory cells with sgrnas targeting fzd7 were enriched at region 1 near the epithelial core of the trajectory and region 3 (fig 4a).other gene knockouts induced strong focal accumulation of cells at one or two positions along the emt continuum (fig 4ab).the pseudospatial regions encompassing the first half of the trajectory were strongly enriched for tgfbr1 and tgfbr2 knockouts (region 1–4 fig 4b expressed sgrna other tgfbr2 expressed sgrna other nontargeting component 1 component 2 cdh1 inner outer ntc tgfbr2 egfr snai2 component 2 component 1 component 2 component 1 component 2 crb3 component 1 component 1 total cell number expression expressed sgrna expressed sgrna expressed sgrna ntc tgfbr1 tgfbr2 ntc tgfbr1 tgfbr2 ntc tgfbr1 tgfbr2 ntc tgfbr1 tgfbr2 component 2 vim fn1 –50 –25 0 25 50 –50 –25 0 25 50 –50 –25 0 25 50 –50 –25 0 25 50 –50 –25 –25 0 25 50 –50 –25 0 25 50 0 25 –25 0 25 –25 0 25 –25 0 25 –25 0 25 –25 0 25 –1.0 0 –1 1 2 0 –1 1 2 –0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 –1.0 –0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 0.00 0.50 0.25 0.75 2000 1500 1000 100 100 fn1 vim 1 1 500 0 fraction in vim clusters component 1 component 2 itgav itgb1 itgb3 egfr fgfr1 fgfr2 met tgfbr1 tgfbr2 il6r fzd2 fzd4 fzd7 ptch1 notch1 notch2 foxa1 foxa2 foxc2 foxd3 foxf1 foxo3 foxq1 gata4 gata6 hmga2 klf8 myc pou5f1 prrx1 snai1 snai2 sox2 sox9 trim28 twist1 twist2 zeb1 zeb2 znf703 transduce with crop- seq knock-out library macro-dissect colony + scrna-seq locked in epithelial state locked in intermediate emt no change in emt transition a b e g d f c fig 3 | multiplexed loss-of-function screening of emt-associated genes recovers deficiencies in tgf-β-induced emt.on sponta- neous emt inhibition of pi3k activity led to a modest increase in cells expressing e-cadherin (fig 4c).in contrast mek inhibition led to a pronounced increase in e-cadherin and an accompanying decrease in vimentin (fig 4cd).inhibiting egfr led to an increase in e-cadherin-positive cells and a decrease in vimentin-positive cells only in spontaneous emt consistent with egfr knockout inducing accumulation in pseudospace only in the absence of tgf-β (fig 4d).conversely met inhibition led to increases in e-cadherin-positive cells in both spontaneous and tgf-β-driven conditions reflecting the pausing of knockout cells along both emt trajectories (fig 4d).although inhibiting mek was not sufficient to prevent activa- tion of the mesenchymal program in mcf10a in the presence of tgf-β cells coexpressed e-cadherin and high levels of vimentin n-cadherin and fibronectin protein (fig 4c and supplementary fig 29).here we show that in the absence of exogenous tgf-β inhibiting raf/mek/erk is sufficient to block exit from the epithelial state and prevent activation of the mesen- chymal gene expression program (fig 4e).taken together these observations point to the existence of ‘checkpoints’ in the emt continuum at which cells can arrest and accumulate creating the impression of discrete stages in bulk cell assays (fig 4f).]
Summary: Accumulation of knockout cells at specific points along the trajectory, identifying regulators of discrete checkpoints in EMT progression.

Text 191
10.1038/s41588-019-0489-5
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 1 | pseudospatial trajectory reconstruction of spontaneous emt reveals the transition as a continuum of epithelial–mesenchymal states. a, schematic of spontaneous confluence-dependent emt assay, cell isolation and pseudospatial trajectory reconstruction using monocle2. red circle denotes the area that defines inner and outer cells for macro-dissection. b,c, t-sne of cells from our spontaneous emt assay. cells are colored according to the fraction from which they were isolated (b) or expression of the mesenchymal marker vim (c). d, trajectory of inner and outer mcf10a cells on spontaneous emt progression. arrow denotes progression of pseudospace. insert, density of cells across pseudospace. e, left, stitched brightfield images of an mcf10a colony at the end of our spontaneous emt assay (scale bar, 2,000µm). right, top to bottom, e-cadherin and dapi staining of cells from the center, middle and edge of the mcf10a colony (scale bar, 50µm; representative fields from six images across three independent samples). f, expression of epithelial and mesenchymal markers across pseudospace. cells are colored as in b. g, hierarchical clustering of kinetic curves for dynamically regulated genes across pseudospace for all 5,004 cells in our experiment (likelihood ratio test, fdr<1×10−10 and auc>10). rows represent row centered dynamics of gene expression. h, geneset analysis using the gene ontology biological processes (go-bp) and msigdb hallmarks geneset collections of gene clusters from g (hypergeometric test, fdr<0.05). i, expression of epithelial and mesenchymal markers across pseudospace in primary human mammary epithelial cells (humec). cells are colored as in b.']. Reference sentences:[to define the transcriptional program executed by normal human cells undergoing emt we devised an in vitro system in which cells from an epithelial colony migrate into unoccupied margins of the plate (fig 1a).cells at the periphery of the patch acquired a spindle-like morphology and formed leading and protruding edges consistent with the acquisition of a mesenchymal phenotype (supplementary fig 1).cells collected from a single well of our assay expressed levels of e-cadherin and vimentin protein span- ning a dynamic range that included those cultured at low or high confluence (supplementary fig 1cd).inner and outer fractions were dissociated into single-cell suspen- sions and subjected to scrna-seq on the 10x chromium platform (fig 1a and supplementary table 1).unsupervised clustering with t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding (t-sne) separated cells from inner and outer fractions (fig 1b) and expression of the mesenchymal marker vim var- ied in a reciprocal gradient to the epithelial markers cdh1 and dsp across embedded cells (fig 1c and supplementary fig 2).protein and messenger rna levels of the epithelial marker e-cadherin (cdh1) decreased as cells radiated from the center of the colony and over the pseudospatial trajectory consistent with a spontaneous spatially determined emt (fig 1ef).conversely mrna levels of vim increased sharply in cells in the second half of the trajectory (fig 1f).cluster 5 highly expressed in the outermost regions of the pseudospatial tra- jectory was associated with the regulation of the cell cycle consis- tent with the relief of contact-mediated inhibition of proliferation (fig 1gh and supplementary table 4).the emt-associated cluster 6 included the unfolded protein response (upr) transcriptional reg- ulator atf4 whose increased expression preceded upregulation of genes in cluster 5 which was enriched for genes associated with the upr (cluster 5 and 6 fig 1gh and supplementary fig 8) consis- tent with a recent study demonstrating that the induction of emt elicits protective activation of the upr32.the dynamics of epithelial and mesenchymal marker expression was comparable albeit with decreased cdh1 downregulation and more drastic upregulation of fn1 (fig 1i and supplementary fig 9c).we sequenced transcriptomes of 2121 inner and 2116 outer colony cells that were segregated in t-sne space but did not form coherent clusters and whose expressed fn1 and vim continuously varied (supplementary fig 10).we therefore constructed a pseudospatial trajectory for tgf-β as well (supplementary fig 11).exposure of humec cells to tgf-β similarly led to a robust increase in vim and fn1 at the beginning of the trajectory (supplementary fig 12c); however expression of cdh2 was not apparent.a broader geneset analysis comparing normalized average expression scores41 showed that tgf-β drove msigdb hallmark emt genes higher and gene ontology biological process epidermis development genes lower in both mcf10a and humec cells (supplementary fig 13).this analysis identified 1328 genes in 10 clusters with distinct tgf-β-dependent dynam- ics (fig 2c likelihood ratio test; fdr < 1 × 10−10 and |δauc| > 0.02 see methods supplementary fig 14 and supplementary table 6).conversely cluster 10 included epithelial marker genes downregulated early in sponta- neous emt and expressed at low levels in cells treated with tgf-β (for example krt4 and krt16) (supplementary fig 16).the most mesenchymal tumor as ranked by puram et al15. expressed emt genes at similar levels to cells at the outer end of our tgf-β-driven pseudospatial trajectory (supplementary fig 17).for three of the four tumors with sufficient cells for monocle analysis the algorithm recovered a linear trajectory (supplementary fig 18) with similar expression kinetics to in vitro trajectories (supplementary fig 18).unsupervised clustering analysis of cells treated with tgf-β identified prominent clearly demarcated clusters of cells that retained expression of the epithelial markers cdh1 and crb3 and failed to upregulate fn1 and vim (fig 3c and supplementary fig 19ab).cells expressing sgrnas targeting tgfbr1 and tgfbr2 were enriched in these clusters (fisher’s exact test; fdr < 1 × 10−50) (fig 3de and supplementary fig 19c) while ntc sgrnas were largely absent from them.for pseudospatial experiments in the absence or presence of tgf-β presented in fig 1 and 2 2000–3000 cells were captured on the chromium platform (10x genomics) using one lane per fraction.the compare_means function from the ggpubr package was used to determine the significance in changes in scores between endpoints in mcf10a and humec emt trajectories (supplementary fig 13) specifying the wilcox.test as the method and using the holm procedure (holm) to correct for multiple hypothesis testing.]
Summary: Trajectory analysis reveals a continuum of cell states during epithelial-mesenchymal transition, with dynamic changes in gene expression patterns across pseudospace.

Text 192
10.1038/s41556-019-0378-2
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 2 | an unbiased catalogue of cell types during amelogenesis. a, pba was used to order 431 cells through the pseudotime of their differentiation trajectory from pre-ameloblast to ameloblast. black regions define the source and sink cells of the trajectory. gene expression along the trajectory was smoothed by averaging over a sliding window of 20 cells along the trajectory. we centred the exploration of gene-expression changes along the ameloblast trajectory around the onset of the expression of known mature ameloblast genes by excluding the first 300 pre-ameloblast cells. the resulting ordering of averaged cells is referred to as the ameloblast differentiation trajectory. b, schematic of the ameloblast differentiation trajectory; dark grey represents earlier cells in the trajectory. c, a heat map of 439 genes that showed statistically significant variability (false discovery rate (fdr)-adjusted p<0.05) along the ameloblast differentiation trajectory. rows are genes, columns are single cells ordered by pseudotime. d–g, expression of selected markers of ameloblast differentiation along pseudotime (scrna-seq; top) and in situ (rnascope; bottom). the y axis shows the average expression of a gene within the window of 20±s.e.m. cells (or +1/(window size) for mean values of zero), normalized to the maximum value. dashed lines outline the epithelium. scale bars, 100μm.']. Reference sentences:[we discovered that cells of the posterior oee the presumed sc location were not proliferative despite rapid epithelial turnover (supplementary fig 1de) and that sc marker genes were more broadly expressed within the incisor growth region than previ- ously appreciated (supplementary fig 2) suggesting that the label- retaining oee cells may not function as scs during homeostasis.interestingly even with the cell cycle regressed out the expression of the putative sc marker genes (sox2 gli1 bmi1 and lrig1) did not localize exclusively to any sub- region of the spring plot (supplementary fig 2cfil).class 2 cells (fig 1d) which formed a simple linear continuum in the spring graph were ordered in pseudotime using popula- tion-balance analysis21 (pba; fig 2a).changes in gene expression through pseudotime (fig 2b–g grey arrow) revealed groups of genes such as amelx ambn enam and mmp20 that are expressed by secretory-stage ameloblasts22 (fig 2de).furthermore we identified groups of genes that were upregulated (clu and steap; fig 2de) downregulated (igfbpl1 and ank2; fig 2g) or transiently upregulated and then downregulated (otop2 and dspp; fig 2f) most of which have not previously been linked to the differentia- tion of ameloblasts (supplementary table 3).the method requires manually selecting source and sink cells of the trajectory which—in our case—were the pre- ameloblast and distal-ameloblast tips respectively (fig 2a).]
Patterns of gene expression changes along a differentiation trajectory from pre-ameloblast to ameloblast, including upregulation, downregulation, and transient changes.

Text 193
10.1126/science.aax1971
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 1. umap projection shows tissues and developmental trajectories in c. elegans embryogenesis. (a) umap projection of the 81,286 cells from our sc-rna-seq dataset that passed our initial qc. this umap does not include 4,738 additional cells that were initially filtered, but were later whitelisted and included in downstream analyses. color indicates the age of the embryo that a cell came from, estimated from correlation to a whole-embryo rna-seq time series (21) and measured in minutes after an embryo’s first cell cleavage. (b) positions of cells from four samples of synchronized embryos on the umap plot. (c) histogram of estimated embryo time for all cells in the dataset. (d) bar plot showing for bins of embryo time, the percentage of cells in that embryo time bin that we were able to assign to a terminal cell type or pre-terminal lineage. (e) scatter plot showing correlation of the number of cells of a given anatomical cell class in a single embryo (x axis, log scale) with the number of cells recovered in our data (y axis, log scale). each point corresponds to a cell class. only cells with estimated embryo time >= 390 min are included in the counts (many earlier cells are still dividing). red line is a linear fit, excluding points with y = 0.']. Reference sentences:[we found that trajectories (24) in the umap projection reflect a smooth progression of embryo time (fig 1a) with cells collected from later time points usually occupying more peripheral positions (fig 1b).approximately 75% of the cells recovered (64384 cells) were from embryos spanning 210-510 min post first cleavage cor- responding to mid-gastrulation (~190 cell stage) to terminal differentiation (3-fold stage of development) (fig 1c); how- ever cells were also recovered from earlier embryos (<210 min 9886 cells) and later embryos (>510 min 11754 cells).the global umap arranges cells into a central group of progenitor cells and branches corresponding to eight major tissues (fig 1a and fig s3): muscle/mesoderm epidermis pharynx ciliated neurons non-ciliated neurons glia/excretory cells intestine and germline.we successfully annotated 93% of cells in our dataset with a cell type (for terminal cells) or a cell lineage (for progenitor cells discussed below) (fig 1d).the number of cells anno- tated for each cell type was variable but roughly fit the expec- tation on the basis of the number of cells of that type present in a single embryo (fig 1e r = 0.64 p = 2.4e-13 t test).(b) umap plot colored by embryo time (colors matched to fig 1a) and gene expression (red indicates >0 reads for the listed gene).]
Summary: Trajectories in umap projection reflect embryo time progression, with cells from different developmental stages occupying distinct positions. Cells are annotated into major tissues.

Text 194
10.1126/science.aax1971
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 3. developmental trajectories of ciliated neurons. (a) umap of 10,740 ciliated neurons and precursors. colors correspond to cell identity. text labels indicate terminal cell types. numbers 1-16 indicate parents of 1 ade-ada, 2 cep-urx 3 phbhsn 4 il1 5 oll 6 olq 7 asj-aua 8 ase 9 asi 10 ask 11 adf-awb 12 asg-awa 13 adl 14 ash-rib 15 afd-rmd 16 awc-saa (purple) and bag-smd (red). 4-6, 810, and 13 are listed as parents of only one cell type as the sister cells die. numbers 17-20 indicate grandparents of 17 il1 (= il2 parent) 18 olq-ury 19, 20 ase-asjaua. differentiated pha was not conclusively identified but may co-cluster with phb. the parent of pha is not present in this umap, but was located separately within the area annotated as “rectal cells” in the umap in fig s3. the tiny cluster labeled with an asterisk () is putatively awc-on on the basis of srt-28 expression. (b) umap plot colored by embryo time (colors matched to fig 1a) and gene expression (red indicates >0 reads for the listed gene). egl-21 codes for an enzyme that is essential for processing neuropeptides (48). its expression is used as a proxy for the onset of neuron differentiation. mcm-7 codes for a dna replication licensing factor. loss of mcm-7 expression in each umap trajectory approximately marks the boundary between neuroblasts and terminal cells. unc-130 is known to be expressed in the asg-awa neuroblast but neither terminal cell (49). (c) cartoon illustrating the lineage of the ase, asj, and aua neurons. (d) heatmap showing patterns of differential transcription factor expression associated with branches in the ase-asjaua lineage. expression values are log-transformed, then centered and scaled by standard deviation for each row (gene).']. Reference sentences:[to examine the molecular basis for such developmental decisions we used recursive umap pro- jections of ciliated neurons (fig 3a) to identify developmen- tal trajectories for all but one of the 22 ciliated neuron types and their parents missing only the pha phasmid neurons.the distinction between neuroblasts and terminal neurons was supported by embryo time estimates consistent with ter- minal cell division times (30) by the expression patterns of cell cycle associated genes and transcription factors (fig 3b) and by the structure of the umap projection.the lineage of the ase asj and aua neurons (span- ning embryo time ~215-650 min) serves as a representative example (fig 3c).about 3-4 tfs are specific to each terminal neuron type in this lineage (fig 3d).we identified a small cluster in the umap with embryo time >700 min as awc-on based on srt-28 expression (fig 3a) (41).(a) umap of 854 il1/2 neurons and progenitors colored by estimated embryo time (cells selected on the basis of annotations in fig 3a and fig s15).]
Developmental trajectories of ciliated neurons based on gene expression patterns, cell identities, and lineage relationships.

Text 195
10.1242/dev.177428
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 1. characterization of multiciliated and goblet cell lineages during airway epithelium regeneration using single-cell rna-seq. (a) model of upper airway epithelium, based on six major types of epithelial cells, with consensus lineage hierarchy. (b) scrna-seq experimental design. regenerating airway epithelia were dissociated on successive days (7, 12 and 28) after a transition to an air-liquid interface (ali). (c) t-sne plots of the scrna-seq expression data highlighting the main cell types observed at ali 7 (3426 cells), ali 12 (2785 cells) and ali 28 (3615 cells) (gray, unassigned cells). (d) relative abundance of the six main cell types at each time point. (e) aggregate t-sne plot of gene expression in 9826 cells. (f) inference of goblet and multiciliated cell lineages by monocle 2, based on an aggregate of the entire experiment. color code is the same as in c. inset shows pseudotime picturing using a white-to-gray gradient along the differentiation trajectory. (g) distribution of the six main cell types in the pseudotime along the two branches of the trajectory from f (bottom, goblet cell branch; top right, multiciliated cell branch). (h) heatmap representing the smoothened temporal expression pattern of a representative list of cell type-specific markers, with branch representations as in g. cells were ordered by branch, then cluster emergence, then pseudotime.']. Reference sentences:[results reconstruction of cell lineage in regenerating airway epithelium by single-cell rna-seq we have analyzed single-cell transcriptomes at successive stages during in vitro 3d differentiation of human airway epithelial cells (haecs) (fig 1ab).this in vitro model faithfully recapitulated cell population compositions found in native airway tissues as shown by a comparison between single-cell (sc) rna-seq of epithelial cells dissociated from nasal brushing samples or from fig 1.single-cell transcriptomes of haecs differentiated pneumacult medium were analyzed at three time points [afterin transition to an air-liquid interface (ali) 7 ali 12 and ali 28] (fig 1b) which are representative of the proliferation polarization and specification steps of regeneration (chevalier et al. 2015).cells clustered in six main populations in pneumacult: (1) cycling (mki67+) bcs; (2) non-cycling (mki67−) bcs (krt5+/ tp63+); (3) suprabcs (krt5+/tp63−/krt13+/krt4+); (4) ccs (scgb1a1+); (5) gcs (muc5ac+); and (6) mccs (foxj1+) (fig 1c; table s1).cell population proportions evolved during the time course with a global reduction in bcs and ccs an initial detection of suprabcs at ali 7 followed by an increase of the proportion of this cell population at ali 28 and an initial detection of gcs and mccs at ali 28 (fig 1d).an aggregated t-sne graph for all cells at all time points for each medium condition was plotted (pneumacult fig 1e; begm fig s3c).a more complex trajectory was observed with pneumacult in which monocle 2 detected a bifurcation into two distinct branches after the sc stage: a larger branch leading to foxj1+ mccs and a smaller one leading to muc5ac+ gcs (fig 1fg).a closer examination of pseudotime ordering and differential gene expression (fig 1h) revealed that some muc5ac+ cells were found on the mcc branch after the gc bifurcation and that some foxj1+ cells retained expression of muc5ac.]
Summary: Differentiation trajectory of cell lineages in airway epithelium regeneration, with distinct branches leading to goblet and multiciliated cells, shown by single-cell RNA-seq.

Text 196
10.1016/j.ccell.2019.08.007
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 3. intratumoral heterogeneity in liver cancer (a) trajectory of malignant cells of each tumor constructed using a reversed graph embedding method. cells were colored by the average expression of ten stemness-related genes (i.e., epcam, krt19, prom1, aldh1a1, cd24, anpep, cd44, icam1, cd47, and sox9). (b) pairwise correlation of all the malignant cells from eight tumors. each pixel in the heatmap represents the correlation of two cells (the corresponding row and column). red, positive correlation; blue, negative correlation.']. Reference sentences:[intratumor transcriptomic biodiversity among tumors could be further revealed by correlation analysis of all malignant cells (figure 3b).we used pcs instead of original gene expression profiles of the malignant cells to measure diversity (i.e. ith) of each tumor to capture major information and reduce noise (figure 3c).we then divided eight tumor samples based on their diversity scores into diversity-high (div-high) and diversity-low (div-low) groups (figure 3e).a combined analysis revealed that some icca tumors had a significantly higher diversity score than hcc tumors (figure 3h).we found that five icca patients had div-high tumors with a poor prognosis and two hcc patients had div-low tumors with a good prognosis while the remaining eight patients (four hcc and four icca) had similar intermediate diversity scores and an intermediate prognosis (figure 3i).there was a significant trend for transcriptomic diversity and its association with patient outcome among div-high div-median and div-low groups (figure 3i).]
Patterns related to cell trajectories were visualized using stemness-related gene expression and correlation analysis among malignant cells in liver cancer.

Text 197
10.1016/j.immuni.2019.09.013
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 6. stip identifies transcriptional circuits downstream of tcf-1 (a) pseudotime trajectory across naive p14 cells and p14 cells from d8 of cl13 and cl13dcd4 infections. pca space was created with the esgs from figure 1. the line represents the longest lineage trajectory predicted by tscan (ji and ji, 2016). (b) expression of tcf7 and other indicated tfs is plotted over pseudotime. (c) a heatmap displaying tf expression across the pseudotime trajectory. (d) a tcf7-centered network was generated (see star methods). border color for each gene represents the mrna-expression relationship with tcf7 (e.g., positively [orange] or negatively [blue] correlated with tcf7 or neither [purple]). fill color indicates the presence of tcf7 binding motif(s) in the open chromatin of the indicated tfs in naive only (cyan), naive and cl13 (dark blue), or cl13 only (red).']. Reference sentences:[thus applying stip to the data above showed tcf7 expression to undergo a monotone increase allowing anchoring on this gene for analysis (figure 6a).several tf genes including tox id3 eomes myb and nr4a1 were positively correlated with tcf7 (figure 6b).we then examined an extended list of tfs (figure 6c).in addition to these two major clusters several tf genes including smad7 gata3 runx2 and zeb2 occupied an intermediate location in the pseudotime trajectory around the point of greatest change for tcf7 and id2 perhaps reﬂecting a metastable state or addi- tional (perhaps transient) population heterogeneity (figure 6c).to further interrogate how tcf-1 might regulate the tfs iden- tified by stips in tex cells we constructed a transcriptional network (figure 6d).we identified tfs predicted to be regulated by tcf-1 in tn cells only (e.g. ikzf1 and gata3) in tn cells and early tex precursor cell populations (e.g. myb hif1a eomes id3 and prdm1) or only in early tex precursor cell populations (e.g. id2 tox zeb2 smad7 batf and nfatc1) (figure 6d).notably tcf-1 was predicted to repress genes that are involved in teff cell differentiation (including id2 prdm1 and runx1) and to promote expression of genes that have been implicated in fostering exhaustion (such as eomes batf and nfatc1) (figure 6d).]
Summary: Trajectory analysis reveals gene expression changes over pseudotime, identifying transcriptional circuits downstream of tcf-1 in single cells.

Text 198
10.1038/s41586-019-1631-3
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 4l). to assess the origin of samacs, we performed in silico trajectory analysis on a combined dataset of peripheral blood monocytes and liver-resident mps. we visualized the transcriptional profile of these cells (fig 3a, extended data fig 5c), mapped them along a pseudotemporal trajectory and interrogated their directionality via spliced and unspliced mrna ratios (rna velocity17). these analyses suggested a differentiation trajectory from peripheral blood monocytes into either samacs or cdcs, with no differentiation from kcs to samacs, and no progression from samacs to kcs (fig 3a, extended data fig 5c). additional rna velocity analyses17 showed downregulation (negative velocity) of the monocyte gene mnda in samacs, upregulation (positive velocity) of the samac marker gene cd9 in tms, and a lack of kc gene timd4 velocity in samacs (extended data fig 5d). furthermore, assessment of the probabilities of cells in this dataset transitioning into samacs indicated a higher likelihood of tms than kcs differentiating into samacs (fig 3b). overall, these data suggest that samacs are monocyte-derived, and represent a terminally differentiated cell state within the fibrotic niche. to characterize the samac phenotype further, we identified differentially expressed genes along monocyte differentiation trajectories. we defined three gene co-expression modules, with module 1 representing upregulated genes during blood monocyte-to-samac differentiation']. Reference sentences:[]
Summary: Differentiation trajectory from monocytes to SAMACs, with specific gene expression changes indicating terminal differentiation within the fibrotic niche.

Text 199
10.1038/s41586-019-1654-9
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 1 | reconstructing human cerebral organoid differentiation from pluripotency. a, scrna-seq was performed on ipsc- and embryonic stem cell (esc)-derived cells (43,498) at different time points during cerebral organoid differentiation from pluripotency. eb, embryoid body; n. ect., neuroectoderm; n. epi., neuroepithelium. b, all time points were combined, pseudocells (11,427) were constructed and the differentiation trajectory was reconstructed using spring17. pseudocells are coloured by time point (main image) or cell line (top left). org., organoid; rgc, radial glial cell. c, rna velocity analysis20 supports differentiation of npcs into distinct regions of the developing human brain. d, left, spring plot coloured (magenta) by reference similarity spectrum (rss) to bulk rna-seq data generated from diverse brain regions at different time points (allen brain atlas)18. shown are the tissues and time points with maximum correlation. cb, cerebellum. right, spring plot coloured (cyan) by marker gene expression. pcw, postconception weeks. e, spring reconstruction based on the rss of organoid']. Reference sentences:[we con- structed a force-directed k-nearest neighbour graph17 based on pseu- docells to visualize the temporal progression (fig 1b).these observations were based on inspection of marker genes comparisons to transcriptomes from regions and cells from the developing human brain1819 and analysis of spliced and unspliced transcripts20 (fig 1c d extended data fig 2).we identified cells on the neuronal lineage (49153 cells) classified distinct cell types from different brain regions analysed differenti- ation trajectories and ordered ventral and dorsal telencephalic cells along pseudotimes (fig 1e–g extended data fig 3).nevertheless gene-expression patterns of each trajectory across the lines were highly correlated and cells rep- resenting each region clustered together (fig 1h i extended data fig 3).nuclei clustered into different populations of neurons astrocytes oligodendrocytes microglia and endothelial cells (fig 4a b extended data fig 10).in the box plots of fig 1g 2d boxes represent iqr and whiskers represent minimum and maximum with outliers removed.letter research extended data fig 10 | supplementary analysis of human chimpanzee and macaque adult brain snrna-seq.]
Summary: Differentiation trajectory of single cells during cerebral organoid development from pluripotency, supported by marker gene expression and bulk RNA-seq data correlation.

Text 200
10.1038/s41586-019-1654-9
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 2 | comparing human and chimpanzee organoids reveals humanspecific features of cortex development. a, scrna-seq was performed on chimpanzee ipsc-derived cells at different time points during cerebral organoid differentiation from pluripotency. b, the differentiation trajectory was reconstructed using spring. pseudocells (9,647) are coloured by time point (main image) or trajectory pseudotimes (p(t)) (top left, alongside human data). non-telenc., non-telencephalon. c, alignment of human and chimpanzee pseudotimes after combining pseudocells from the early stages and the dorsal forebrain lineage. d, box plots (outliers removed) showing cumulative expression of neuron projection-related genes in human and chimpanzee along unaligned cortical pseudotimes. boxes represent iqr and whiskers represent minimum and maximum with outliers removed. e, astrocytes identified']. Reference sentences:[these observations were based on inspection of marker genes comparisons to transcriptomes from regions and cells from the developing human brain1819 and analysis of spliced and unspliced transcripts20 (fig 1c d extended data fig 2).we used time warping to align human and chimpanzee cortical pseudotimes and observed that the latest pseu- dotime points in chimpanzee failed to map to a human counterpart (fig 2c).we found that chimpanzee neurons express higher levels of neuron maturation-related genes (fig 2d) and confirmed differences in maturation using scrna-seq data from additional human and chimpanzee individuals1516 as well as from macaque (extended data fig 5 6).we next aligned all human chimpanzee and macaque reads to a consensus genome and aligned dorsal telencephalic trajec- tories between the species (fig 2f extended data fig 7).we then searched for genes that were differentially expressed specifically on the human branch and found that most of the observed human- specific deviations from chimpanzee and macaque were expression gains (fig 2g); this was also observed for chimpanzee-specific changes (extended data fig 7).of the 98 identified differentially expressed genes 96 clustered into 7 pseudotemporal patterns (fig 2h–j) with clusters 1 2 and 3 specifically enriched in human radial glia intermediate progenitors and neurons respectively (fig 2h).genes with human-specific expression gain are associated with diverse biological processes including proliferation of radial glia neuron migration and neurite formation and are localized to different clusters of maturing neurons (fig 2i j extended data fig 7).heterogeneity analysis of human (extended data fig 2 supplementary tables 3 4) and chim- panzee (extended data fig 4 supplementary tables 5 6) full lineage data was performed using t-sne based on the top pcs identified (top 20 pcs for human top 15 pcs for chimpanzee).letter research extended data fig 2 | see next page for caption.]
Summary: Comparison of human and chimpanzee single-cell trajectories during cortex development reveals species-specific differences in gene expression patterns related to neuron maturation.

Text 201
10.1073/pnas.1907883116
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 5. the differentiation state of t cells for 7 supercentenarians (sc1–sc7) and 5 controls (ct1–ct5). (a) pseudotime trajectory of t cells estimated using monocle 2. a continuous value from 0 to 12 was assigned to each cell as a pseudotime. the bottom shows the general scheme of t cell differentiation. tn, naïve; tcm, central memory; tem, effector memory; and temra, effector memory reexpressing cd45ra. (b) expression transition of differentiationassociated genes along the pseudotime. (c) percentages of t cells along the pseudotime for supercentenarians (sc) and controls (ct). (d) percentages of cd4 and ct8 ctls among the total t cells along the pseudotime. (e) correlation of gene expression between cd4 and cd8 ctls. (f) expression transition of selected genes shown separately for cd4 and cd8 ctls.']. Reference sentences:[to understand the cd4+gzmb+ t cells in the context of differentiation we constructed single-cell tra- jectories using the monocle 2 (version 2.4.0) r package (35); all t cells in tc1 and tc2 were placed on these trajectories based on changes in their transcriptomes (fig 5a and si appendix fig s6a).we observed rapid reduction of ccr7 expression followed by the gradual loss of costimulatory molecules cd27 and cd28 (fig 5b) indicating that early pseudotime corresponds to naïve and central memory t cells.the results also showed a gradual increase of expression of gzma gzmb and prf1 which en- code cytotoxic molecules as well as concordant patterns of ex- pression of transcripts encoding adhesion and migration molecules (fig 5b and si appendix fig s6c) indicating progressive dif- ferentiation states of effector memory t cells corresponding to late pseudotime.the t cells of the supercentenarians were clearly shifted toward more differentiated states compared with those of the controls (fig 5c): nearly 60% of t cells in the controls were placed in the earliest pseudotime corresponding to naïve and central memory t cells whereas t cells of supercentenarians were enriched in late pseudotime.cd4 ctls were distributed in the latter half of pseudotime in a similar way to cd8 ctls (fig 5d and si appendix fig s6f) indicating a similar differentiation process despite fundamental functional differences between the 2 cell types.indeed mean expression values were highly correlated between cd4 and cd8 ctls with the exception of a small number of genes (fig 5e).the expression of 4 major cytotoxic genes gzma gzmb prf1 and nkg7 which are known to be abundant in cd4 ctls (32 36) increased along the latter half of pseudotime in a similar manner between cd4 and cd8 ctls; however the expression of 2 other major cytotoxic genes gzmh and gnly showed slightly different patterns for cd4 and cd8 ctls (fig 5f and si appendix fig s6g).to explore the mechanism by which cd4 ctls increased in supercentenarians we performed an a b c d e f fig 5.]
Summary: Differentiation trajectories of T cells, showing transitions in gene expression and distribution of cell types along pseudotime, with similarities between CD4 and CD8 CTLs.

Text 202
10.1016/j.cell.2019.10.027
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 2. compositions and functions of epithelial subsets in control and pibd (a) tsne plot displaying 6,960 epithelial cells separated into 10 subtypes. (b) heatmap showing subtype-specific marker genes. relative expression was defined as the gene-wise (row) z-score of normalized umi counts (in(umi-per10000+1)) across epithelial subtypes (column). (c) heatmap showing differentially expressed transcription factors in epithelial cells. (d) heatmap showing expression of ibd risk genes in epithelial cells (table s3; star methods). (e) developmental trajectory of stem cells, absorptive progenitors, and secretory progenitors along pseudo-time in two-dimensional space. (f) expression of ibd risk genes on the trajectory maps. cells are color-coded by their normalized unique molecular identifier (umi) counts. see also figure s2 and table s3.']. Reference sentences:[novel risk genes expressed in epithelial cells contribute to pibd pathogenesis we captured 6960 epithelial cells and sub-clustered them into 10 subsets (figures 2a and 2b) according to previously defined marker genes (parikh et al. 2019) after which cluster-specific differentially expressed transcription factors (tfs) were identi- fied (figure 2c).dvl1 affecting epithelial regeneration via b-catenin and wnt activation (gao and chen 2010; moparthi and koch 2019) was expressed in stem and secretory progenitor cells (figure 2f).undifferentiated1 (1) undifferentiated2 (2) mitotic undifferentiated (3) colonocytes (4) colonocytes−best4 (5) goblet (6) mitotic goblet (7) paneth (8) tuft (9) enteroendocrine (10) -25 50 tsne1 0 50 tsne2 25 -25 0 25 1 2 3 4 6 7 8 5 9 10 a olfm4tmsb10 dmbt1 lcn2 reg1a adh1c eef1g mgst1 lefty1 mki67 ube2c fabp1 aqp8 slc26a3 ceacam7 sepp1il32 plac8 ca4 phgr1 ca2 pkib krt20 ca7 otop2 best4 pcsk1n otop3spib msln guca2b guca2a slc2a5 mt1h ctse ceacam3 lypd8 zg16 clca1 tff3 spink4 itln1 reg4 wfdc2 defa6 defa5 reg3a lyz reg1b itln2 pcsk1 pla2g2a trim50 lrmp fyb plcg2 alox5 hck trpm5 ptgs1 chga scgn neurod1 chgb scg3 gcg scg2 scg5 tph1 -1.5 -0.5 0.5 1.5 relative expression b undifferentiated1 undifferentiated2 mitotic undifferentiated colonocytes colonocytes−best4 goblet mitotic goblet paneth tuft enteroendocrine cacna2d1 rtn1 ern1 vwa1 ddx5 anxa3 psma6 cbfa2t3 piezo1 mpst cfdp1 nfkbia casp7 myadm ssu72 mrpl20 atxn10 ppp1r1b nfkbiz aprt rps9 cyba dvl1 −1.5 0.0 1.5 relative expression agr2 il13ra1 il17rb fev neurod1 pdlim5 gtf2i h1fx runx1 anxa1 pou2f3 zfhx3 hmg20b hes6 creb3l1 atoh1 spdef npdc1 tff3 spib hes4 mafb hp1bp3 ezh2 mxd3 hist1h2bn kif22 hmgb2 prdx5 ran ybx1 hnrnpa1 suclg1 hes1 polr2a id2 sox4 relative expression -2 -1 0 1 2 undifferentiated1 undifferentiated2 mitotic undifferentiated colonocytes colonocytes−best4 goblet mitotic goblet paneth tuft enteroendocrine c •1 −2 −1 0 1 −2 0 2 4 dim2 dim1 stem cells absorptive progenitors secretory progenitors −2 −1 0 1 −2 0 2 4 0 2 −2 −1 0 1 −2 0 2 4 0 3 −2 −1 0 1 −2 0 2 4 0 3 −2 −1 0 1 −2 0 2 4 0 2 dvl1 ern1 piezo1 psma6 e f dim2 dim1 stem cells aps sps −2 −1 0 1 −2 0 2 4 0 4 −2 −1 0 1 −2 0 2 4 −2 −1 0 1 −2 0 2 4 0 4 0 5 −2 −1 0 1 −2 0 2 4 0 2 cyba nfkbia nfkbiz ppp1r1b undifferentiated1 undifferentiated2 colonocytes colonocytes−best4 goblet paneth tuft enteroendocrine d figure 2.]
Summary: Trajectory of stem cells, absorptive progenitors, and secretory progenitors in single-cell epithelial subsets, with expression of IBD risk genes along the trajectory.

Text 203
10.1038/s41593-019-0532-y
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 6 | characterization of human brain-tumor-linked microglia clusters by cytof. a, pseudotemporal ordering of single-cell transcriptomes using stemid, with transcriptionally similar nodes on the y axis and single-cell transcriptomes arranged along the x axis, based on a pseudotemporal ordering on a trajectory from a control to a gbm-affected brain. next to the diffusion map are representative genes from the given nodes and go terms significantly enriched in these nodes. the color bar represents the z-score for the gene expression across the pseudotime trajectory. b, cytof analysis of 11 control and 13 gbm samples reveals distinct clustering of cells from each condition. c, stacked bar plot showing the relative contribution of microglia from each control and gbm sample to the control and glioma cluster from b. d, t-sne plots for representative protein markers assessed using cytof. e, a heatmap representation of protein expression shows distinct clustering of control microglia and gams. f, overview of protein markers encoded by genes (symbols in parentheses) with higher expression along the pseudotemporal trajectory from a. proteins with p<0.05 using one-sided unpaired t-tests are shown. data are provided on n=11 control and n=13 gbm samples. mean expressions are color-coded for each sample; each circle represents an independent sample. g, overview of protein markers encoded by genes (symbol in parentheses) with lower expression along the pseudotemporal trajectory from a. p values are provided for one-sided unpaired t-tests followed by sidak–bonferroni correction for multiple testing. data on n=11 control and n=13 gbm samples are displayed. the horizontal lines represent the mean; each circle represents an independent sample.']. Reference sentences:[previously published microglial core signature genes3940 including cx3cr1 tmem119 csf1r p2ry12 p2ry13 selplg and marcks were expressed by all clusters with the highest expression levels for clusters c2 and c3 (fig 2c; extended data fig 6).the resulting heatmap showed a gradual downregulation of microglial homeostatic genes (including cx3cr1 and csf1r) and a concomitant upregulation of inflammatory and metabolism genes (including trem2 and apoe) with enrichment of the associ- ated go terms (fig 6a; supplementary table 11).importantly we obtained a similar result using the independent pseudotime analysis tool monocle46 (supplementary fig 6).next we used cytof to determine whether the transcriptional changes are also found on the protein level (fig 6b–g).notably gams clustered distinctly from control microglia (fig 6b).while fewer cells from the control sam- ples were found in the gam cluster some gbm samples contrib- uted substantially to the control cluster (fig 6c) which may reflect aging-related control microglia subsets within the gbm samples.specifically we found higher expression of hla-dr trem2 apoe gpr56 (also known as adgrg1) and a number of other proteins such as glut5 and cd64 (fig 6fg; supplementary fig 8; supplementary table 12).conversely genes with lower expression on the transcriptomic level (cx3cr1 csf1r and fcgr1a) were unchanged or even showed higher expression on the protein level (fig 6g) which may be related to dif- ferent protein turnover and post-transcriptional regulatory mecha- nisms.for fig 6a pseudotime analysis was conducted using the stemid2 r algorithm37.for fig 6ef one-sided unpaired t-test was used followed by sidak– bonferroni correction for multiple testing.for supplementary fig 6ab pseudotime analysis was performed using the monocle r package46 with default settings.]
Summary: Trajectory analysis reveals changes in gene expression along a pseudotemporal trajectory from control to glioma-affected microglia, with distinct protein marker clustering.

Text 204
10.1038/s41590-019-0544-5
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 4 | scrna-seq and tcr analysis of peanut-dependent activated t cells from one of the individuals with an allergy to peanut (patient 77) combined with pseudotemporal analysis. a, clonal size of tcrb clonotypes mapped onto t-sne visualization of transcriptomic data (n=1,496 cells). b, expression of canonical markers associated with naïve/central memory, t cell activation and th2 phenotypes. color indicates log-normalized gene expression (yellow to red). c, pseudotime trajectory (top) of scrna-seq results with tcrb clonal size mapped (bottom). d, th2 pathogenic marker expression amongst expanded (n≥5 cells per clonotype, resulting in 16 total clonotypes included) tcrb clonotypes with high pseudotime value (mean>0.4, see extended data fig 5b). gene expression represents averages within each clonotype group and scaled across all groups. structural amino acids shown in gray. number of cells shown in parentheses. color indicates scaled and log-normalized gene expression (purple to yellow).']. Reference sentences:[peripheral blood mononuclear cells (pbmcs) from four patients were incubated overnight with peanut antigens and then sorted for cd154+ expression to enrich anti- gen-activated cells3233 (supplementary fig 4a and supplementary table 9; methods).single-cell rna-seq was then performed on the sorted cells via seq-well and the corresponding tcr sequences were recovered (supplementary fig 4b–d and supplementary table 10).the differences observed were due in part to varied expression of a number of genes associated with basal cellular functions including sex-linked genes (xist and rps4y1) that were upregulated in cells from female and male subjects respectively (supplementary fig 4e and supplementary table 9).one of the patients (patient 77) exhibited a substantial expansion of t cells sharing common tcr sequences relative to the others (all patients: supplementary fig 4bc; patient 77: fig 4a).3637) (fig 4b).composite scores of known signatures of cd4+ t cell subtypes confirmed an enrichment of th2 signature in some of the expanded t cells38 (supplementary fig 4f).to examine whether these heterogeneous t cells from patient 77 might represent a spectrum of activation states we next performed pseudo- temporal analysis that showed a trajectory correlated with the degree of t cell stimulation marked by increased expression of jun fos nfkb and cd154 among others3239 (extended data fig 4).the t cells most associated with activation on the trajectory were also the most clonally expanded (rs = 0.39 n = 851 p < 0.001 by spearman; fig 4c).further our pseudotemporal trajectory cor- related strongly with expression of il-5 il-9 il-13 and il-17rb known to encode markers of pathogenic th2 cells3435 (extended data fig 4 cluster 1).among such cells a subset of clonotypes exhibited th2 functional signatures (fig 4d).genes of interest (modules from fig 3 clusters 3 and 4 from extended data fig 4) were queried against gene sets from msigdb to calculate significant overlap of gene signatures5152.a msigdb analysis of genes enriched early (cluster 3 in extended data fig 4a; n = 38 genes) or late (cluster 4 in extended data fig 4a; n = 123 genes) on the pseudotemporal trajectory.b pseudotime distribution of expanded clones shown in fig 4d.]
Summary: Trajectory analysis reveals activation states and pathogenic markers in expanded T cell clones from a peanut-allergic individual.

Text 205
10.1038/s41590-019-0544-5
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 4a; n=38 genes) or late (cluster 4 in extended data fig 4a; n=123 genes) on the pseudotemporal trajectory. description indicates cell state enriched with the corresponding gene set in comparison to another cell state. fdr q-values represent benjamini and hochberg-corrected, one-tailed hypergeometric p values. see supplementary table 12 for more details. b, pseudotime distribution of expanded clones shown in fig 4d. number of cells for each clonotype group indicated in parenthesis. a total of 16 clonotype groups are shown. all box and whisker plots indicate the (box) 25th and 75th percentile along with (whisker)+/− 1.5interquartile range (b). data represent an individual experiment with 1847 single-cells from one patient (patient 77; a,b).']. Reference sentences:[]
Summary: The distribution of gene sets along a pseudotemporal trajectory and the pseudotime distribution of expanded clones in single cells.

Text 206
10.1371/journal.pbio.3000528
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 3. spleen scrna-seq reveals that nm-rs have an lps-responsive cell subset not found in mice. umap projections showing cell clusters from two saline control (left panel) and two lps-challenged (right panel) mouse (a) and nm-r (b) spleens. each point is a cell color-coded by its cluster assignment and annotated cell type (materials and methods). stacked bar charts show the proportions (%) of cells assigned to each cell type in the saline control (left) and lps-challenged (right) mouse (c) and nm-r (d) spleens. umap projections showing cell clusters representing ltf-high neutrophils (pink) and neutrophils (yellow) from saline control (e) and lpschallenged (f) nm-r spleens. overlaid on each cluster are arrows that represent the cell trajectory (see materials and methods). bar charts show gseas comparing ltfhigh neutrophils to neutrophils from saline control (see s29 table for underlying data) (g) and lps-challenged (see s30 table for underlying data) (h) nm-r spleens. x-axes are the gsea log10-adjusted p-values (q-values), signed and color-coded by the direction of the effect (up- and down-regulation in ltf-high neutrophils versus neutrophils: yellow and cyan, respectively). black vertical dashed lines mark adjusted p = 0.1. dc, dendritic cell; gsea, gene set enrichment analysis; lps, lipopolysaccharide; nk, natural killer; nm-r, naked mole-rat; pdc, plasmacytoid dendritic cell; scrna-seq, single-cell rna-sequencing; umap, uniform manifold approximation and projection.']. Reference sentences:[spleen scrna-seq revealed that cells from both saline con- trol and lps-challenged animals of both species clustered into similar cell types to those observed in untreated animals (fig 3a and 3b; s18–s25 tables).the most striking species difference we observed following the lps challenge was the change in the proportion of immune cells assigned to each nm-r cluster (fig 3c and 3d).the increase of ltf-high neutrophils in lps-challenged nm-rs was accompanied by a convergence between the neutrophil and ltf-high neutrophil clusters in the uniform man- ifold approximation and projection (umap) [22] embedding space (fig 3b).in addition unlike in the saline control the trajectories of nm-r lps-challenged neutrophils trended towards ltf-high neutrophils (fig 3b 3e and 3f).gsea of genes differentially expressed between the saline control ltf-high neutrophils and neutrophils indicated mainly down-regu- lation (adjusted p < 0.1) of chemotaxis pathways in ltf-high neutrophils (or up-regulation in neutrophils) (fig 3g; s29 table).a similar analysis in the lps-challenged nm-rs showed up- regulation of humoral immune responses mediated by antimicrobial peptides and down-regu- lation of viral replication processes host–pathogen interactions and negative regulation of immune cell proliferation in ltf-high neutrophils (both adjusted p < 0.1) (fig 3h; s30 table).]
Summary: Trajectory analysis reveals convergence between neutrophil clusters in response to LPS challenge in NM-R spleens, with down-regulation of chemotaxis pathways in LTF-high neutrophils.

Text 207
10.1038/s41593-019-0539-4
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 5 | grn analysis predicts transcription factors for conversion of control to alzheimer’s disease subcluster signatures. a, heatmap of scores from top transcription factor regulons with respect to each cell transition from control subclusters to alzheimer’s disease subclusters. note that some transitions, such as m4 to m2 and m5 to m2, are not shown, as no significant transcription factor regulons were identified after post-processing of cellrouter outputs (see methods). b, tfeb network with downstream gwas targets. c, top functional enrichment terms of tfeb networks driving cell transitions for transitions a3 to a1 (n=139 genes), a6 to a1 (n=57 genes), a7 to a1 (n=166 genes), and a8 to a1 (n=126 genes), as well as genes that conserved all of the four aforementioned trajectories (n=37 genes). multiple testing correction was done using the benjamini–hochberg method; padj, adjusted p value. enrichment analysis was performed using the hypergeometric test.']. Reference sentences:[as expected the highest variance was due to cell type (median variance of 2.9% across all degs) and interindividual variability accounted for a proportion of the variance in individual cell types (median variance of 1.6% across all degs extended data fig 5 and supplementary table 6).we further explored the functional relevance of gwas genes using two paradigms: we first examined subcluster-specific changes in the expression of top alzheimer’s disease gwas genes (fig 4b–g and supplementary table 9) and we integrated gwas genes into transcription factor-driven regulatory modules to understand the drivers of cell transitions from a healthy state into an alzheimer’s disease state (fig 5 and extended data fig 10).our analysis unveiled common transcrip- tion factors predicted to control multiple transitions within a cell type such as aebp1 (fig 5a) with previously reported upregula- tion in alzheimer’s disease brains46 and association with amyloid pathology47.our analysis identified several other transcrip- tion factors with high grn scores for multiple lineage conversions to alzheimer’s disease subclusters including sox10 myrf and nkx6−2 predicted to regulate the generation of n1 o1/o2 and a1 subclusters (fig 5a) with functional enrichment of glial and neuro- nal development myelination and the unfolded protein response respectively (extended data fig 9c).our analyses also showed that the tfeb gene which was upregulated in diseased astrocytes49 acts upstream of ten gwas loci for alzheimer’s disease (bin1 cldn11 poln stk32b edil3 akap12 hecw1 wdr5 lemd2 and dlc1) which are also dysregulated in alzheimer’s disease astrocytes (fig 5b).notably this upregulated regulatory module which is enriched in chaperone-mediated responses (fig 5c) underlies the cellular transitions from control to alzheimer’s disease states in spe- cific astrocyte subpopulations which had otherwise been missed in bulk tissue expression data alone.our assessment of interindividual variability showed that within each cell type detection of some degs was also explained by indi- vidual or sex differences (extended data fig 5).the top five gene ontology terms for each transition were plotted in fig 5c.c functional annotation of gene regulatory networks (grns) controlled by tfs in fig 5a.]
Summary: Identification of transcription factors driving cell transitions in Alzheimer's disease subclusters, with functional enrichment in glial and neuronal development, myelination, and unfolded protein response.

Text 208
10.1016/j.celrep.2019.10.131
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 4. transcriptomic continuum between til and dln tumor-reactive cells (a) violin plots of differentially expressed genes across til group i th1 and dln group iv ccr7+ (clusters t1-2 and n5, respectively, as shown in figure 1a), as well as all other til and dln populations. unpaired t-test; p < 0.001. (b) heatmap shows row-standardized expression of differentially expressed genes across dln ccr7+ clusters (group iv n5-6) and other dln clusters (treg and tfh clusters n1 and n7-8, respectively). (c) flow cytometry contour plots of cxcr5 versus ccr7 in foxp3à dln cells (top). overlaid protein expression of bcl6 and cd200 in ccr7+ and cxcr5+ dln cells and naive cd4+ splenocytes from tumor-free control mice (bottom). data are representative of 17 mice analyzed in three experiments. (d) flow cytometry contour plots of cxcr5 versus pd-1 in dln and arm cells. data are representative of 10 mice analyzed in two experiments. (e) contour plot of dln (red, clusters n7-8) and arm (blue) tfh cell distribution according to scrna-seq-detected normalized expression of icos versus maf (top). overlaid protein expression of icos in dln and arm pd-1+cxcr5+ (tfh) cells and naive cd4+ splenocytes from tumor-free control mice (bottom). (f) heatmap shows row-standardized expression of differentially expressed genes across til isc and nres clusters (as defined in the text, group ii t3-4 and t5, respectively) and all other til clusters (th1 and treg clusters t1-2 and t6-7, respectively). (g) percentage of il7r+foxp3à cells out of total pd-1+ or gp66+ tils. nine mice analyzed in two experiments. (h) trajectory analysis of pd-1+ tils and gp66+ dln cells, indicating individual cells’ assignment into a transcriptional continuum trajectory. nres cluster (t5) is color coded orange in contrast to annotations in other figures. see also figure s4 and table s2.']. Reference sentences:[the potential connection between ccr7+ dln cells and th1 tils was specific to ccr7+ cluster n5 which segregated from n6 and other dln subsets (tfh and treg cells) based partly on higher expression of cd200 (figure 4b).unexpectedly meta-cluster 1 associated the dln and arm tfh clusters with til group ii cluster t5 characterized by il7r expression (figures 1a and 3a) based partly on slightly higher expression of tcf7 (1.6-fold) relative to other til subpop- ulations (figure 4f).flow cytometric analysis confirmed the presence of gp66-specific il-7r+ tils (figure 4g).this placed the dln tfh and til th1 and isc at the end of an inferred path (figure 4h) nres tils in the middle of the continuum and ccr7+ dln cells between tfh and nres.accordingly pd- 1 was expressed on most clone 13-responding spleen cd4+ t cells (figure s5b) unlike among arm-responding cd4+ t cells in which pd-1 expression was specific to cxcr5hi tfh cells (figure 4d).expression of pd-1 in gp66-specific tils was similar to that in clone 13-responding cells (figure 5b) and higher than in dln gp66-specific cells (of which only the cxcr5+ subset was pd-1hi figure 4d).cell reports 29 3019–3032 december 3 2019 3025 figure 4.]
Trajectory patterns between different cell clusters in single-cell transcriptomics data, including differentiation and progression markers.

Text 209
10.1126/science.aax6234
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 4. hdac inhibitor trajectory captures cellular heterogeneity in drug response and biochemical affinity. (a) nearest-neighbor alignment and umap embedding of transcriptional profiles of cells treated with one of seventeen hdac inhibitors. pseudodose root displayed as a red dot. (b) ridge plots displaying the distribution of cells along pseudodose by dose. shown for 3 hdac inhibitors with varying biochemical affinities. (c) relationship between log transcriptional ec50 (tc50) and average log10(ic50) from in vitro measurements. asterisks indicate compounds with a solubility below 200 mm (in dmso) that were not included in the fit.']. Reference sentences:[pracinostat in a549) while other drugs induced much greater cellular heterogeneity (fig 4b and fig s22).with the exception of 2 relatively insoluble compounds our calculated tc50 values increased as a function of compound ic50 values (fig 4c and fig s27 b and c).]
Summary: Trajectory analysis reveals cellular heterogeneity in drug response and biochemical affinity, with a correlation between transcriptional and in vitro measurements.

Text 210
10.1073/pnas.1915571116
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 4. divergent fates of monocyte lineage cells in aire−/− retinas. (a) umap plot from aire−/− retinas showing different subtypes of monocyte lineage cells. (b) cell trajectory of monocyte lineage cells showing a bifurcation into mo-mφs and mo-dcs. (c) heatmap showing branch expression analysis modeling of the branch point between mo-mφs (left) and mo-dcs (right). (d) expression of cd14, mrc1, p2ry12, smad7, and zbtb46 along the cell trajectory shown in b. (e) immunostaining of cross-sections of wt vs. aire−/− retinas showing p2ry12 (green), cd14 (red), iba1 (magenta), and nuclei (dapi; blue). a p2ry12+ cd14+ cell is indicated by the arrows. (f) immunostaining as in e for p2ry12 (green), mrc1 (red), iba1 (magenta), and nuclei (dapi; blue). most iba1+ p2ry12+ cells are mrc1− (indicated by arrowheads) with a minority being mrc1+ (indicated by arrows). (g) barplots showing mean log10 normalized expression per cell for cd68, aif1, and lgals. p value < 0.05 and p value < 0.01. (h) immunostaining as in e for cd68 (green), iba1 (red), galectin 3 (magenta), and nuclei (dapi; blue). (scale bars in e, f, and h, 50 μm.)']. Reference sentences:[based on recent scrna-seq studies of microglia and macrophages in the brain and retina (28–30) we were able to further resolve the cells of the mono- cyte lineage into monocytes monocyte-derived macrophages (mo-mφs) monocyte-derived dendritic cells (mo-dcs) repli- cating monocytes perivascular macrophages and plasmacytoid dendritic cells (fig 4a).since monocytes mφ-committed mo mo-mφs dc-committed mo and mo-dcs formed a continuum on a umap plot from aire−/− retinas (fig 4a) we constructed a cell trajectory map for these cell types.starting with ccr2+ monocytes this trajectory bifurcates into mo-mφs (branch 1) and mo-dcs (branch 2) (fig 4b).downloaded at interuniversitaire de medecine on december 20 2019 markers including trem2 and hexb (fig 4c).similarly as monocytes progress toward mo-dcs they increase expression of dc markers including clec9a and zbtb46 (fig 4c).fig 4d illustrates on a cell-by-cell basis the changing patterns of expression for 5 mark- ers: cd14 which is enriched in monocytes mφ-committed mo and mo-mφs; mrc1 which codes for cd206 and is expressed in monocytes and mφ-committed mo; p2ry12 which is enriched in mo-mφs (and microglia); smad7 which is a marker of tgf-β signaling and is up-regulated as monocytes convert to mo-mφs and to mo-dcs; and zbtb46 a marker of dendritic cells which is enriched in mo-dcs.pnas latest articles | 5 of 11 immunology and inflammation downloaded at interuniversitaire de medecine on december 20 2019 1 celltype dc-committed mo mф-committed mo mo-dc mo-mф monocytes replicating mo 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1 1 1 1 1 cd14 mrc1 p2ry12 smad7 zbtb46 -0.4 0 0.4 -0.4 0 0.4 -0.4 0 0.4 -0.4 0 0.4 -0.4 0 0.4 0 25 50 75 component 1 component 2 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 log10 normalized expression a b c d e p2ry12 cd14 dapi + p2ry12 + cd14 + iba1 wt aire-/- onl inl gcl onl inl gcl p2ry12 + cd14 g h cd68 iba1 galectin 3 dapi + cd68 + iba1 + galectin 3 wt aire-/- onl inl gcl onl inl gcl onl inl gcl onl inl gcl wt aire-/- p2ry12 mrc1 dapi + p2ry12 + mrc1 + iba1 p2ry12 + mrc1 f 45.0 47.5 50.0 52.5 55.0 57.5 48 52 56 umap 1 umap 2 cell type (1) dc-committed mo (2) mф-committed mo (3) mo-dc (4) mo-mф (5) monocytes (6) plasmacytoid dc (7) perivascular mф (8) replicating mo slc2a5 p2ry12 trem2 hexb tmem119 fcrls zbtb46 ccr7 flt3 itgae clec9a dpp4 anxa8 ly6c2 ccr2 1 0 1 2 3 mo-mф mo-dc branch point z-score macrophage/ microglial markers dendritic cell markers monocyte markers cd68 microglia mo-mф aire-/- wt log10 normalized expression lgals3(galectin 3) microglia mo-mф aif1(iba1) microglia mo-mф aire-/- aire-/- branch 1 (mo-mф) branch 2 (mo-dc) 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 fig 4.downloaded at interuniversitaire de medecine on december 20 2019 p2ry12+;cd14+ cells in the subretinal space (fig 4 e and f).in aire−/− retinas lgals3 was up-regulated in both mo-mφs and resident microglia (p value < 0.01 for both) but cd68 was unchanged (fig 4g).interestingly we observed increased immunostaining for both galectin-3 and cd68 in ibai+ cells in aire−/− retinas (fig 4h) suggesting that cd68 may be regulated post- transcriptionally.transcripts coding for iba1 (aif1) a commonly used marker for microglia and macrophages were only modestly up-regulated (p value < 0.05 for microglia and p value < 0.01 for mo-mφs) (fig 4g) whereas iba1 immuno- staining was substantially increased in aire−/− retinas in both mo-mφs and microglia (fig 4h).]
Summary: Cell trajectory analysis reveals bifurcation of monocyte lineage cells into mo-mφs and mo-dcs, with distinct marker expressions along the trajectory.

Text 211
10.1371/journal.pgen.1008506
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 4. single-cell rna-seq expression of late stage asexual parasites identifies three distinct populations. a) principal component analysis (pca) was used to visualize the clustering of 46 single late stage asexual transcriptomes. b) consensus clustering indicates that parasites within the same cluster show the strongest similarity when compared to parasites from other clusters. however, there is significant heterogeneity even between parasites in the same cluster. blue indicates low similarity between two cells, whereas red indicates high similarity, i.e. that the two cells are always assigned to the same cluster. single parasites are also annotated for their expression of gdv1 by its log normalized expression. c) pseudotemporal ordering of 46 single asexual parasites by monocle 2. genes expressed differentially between the 3 clusters detected by sc3 were used for ordering cells and inferring a trajectory. cells are colored by pseudotime and shapes indicate their assignment to one of the 3 clusters.']. Reference sentences:[after removing gametocytes we performed unsupervised clustering using the clustering method implemented in sc3 [24] which separated the remaining 46 single asex- ual parasites into three distinct groups (fig 4a).additionally multiple pseudotime analyses with and without these clusters as an indicator variable revealed the clear ordering of single parasites into three distinct and separate clusters which started with cluster 2 and progressed to cluster 1 followed by cluster 3 (fig 4c and s2 fig).we processed the transcriptomes of 172 late-stage asexual p. falciparum the same way as our fig 4.we then used the ddrtree dimensionality reduction algorithm from monocle to align the cells on a branched path as shown in fig 4c.]
Summary: Trajectory analysis reveals three distinct cell populations in single-cell transcriptomes of late-stage parasites.

Text 212
10.1038/s41467-019-13657-6
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 4 ica on cgnp-like tumor cells demonstrates self-renewal and differentiation. a t-sne projection of cgnp-like cells from vehicle-treated tumors directed by ica, with nodes av–cv color-coded. b ica t-sne as in a, with ic2v color-coded from yellow (high) to blue (low). c feature plot of ccnd1, e2, a2 and b2 on ica t-sne in a. arrows are placed according to indicated marker expression and show the expected sequence of cyclins through the cell cycle. d pseudotime trajectories inferred by ic2v and cyclin expression, plotted on ica t-sne in a. e dot plot showing expression of developmental markers across nodes av–cv. average expression values are calculated from all cells in each node, including cells with no detectable copies of the transcript.']. Reference sentences:[ic 2v defined a gradient of neuronal differentiation across node cv (fig 4b).based on these observations we infer that ica sorts medulloblastoma cells into various stages of two fundamental processes the cyclic self- renewal of proliferative cells and the terminal differentiation of cells exiting the cell cycle (fig 4d).we found sequential expression across the nodes of the proliferation markers mki67 pcna ccnd1 and ccnd2 shh-pathway marker gli1 cgnp markers atoh1 and barhl late cgnp marker cntn2 (aka tag1) and the neuronal markers rbfox3 (aka neun) and meg3 (supplementary fig 4).these markers parsed the progression of cells from nodes av–cv along a cgnp-like developmental trajectory from proliferative and undifferentiated to proliferative with early neural differentiation to non-prolif- erative with advanced neural differentiation (fig 4e) consistent with the differentiation trajectory identified by ica and terminating in mature neurons.]
Patterns of differentiation and self-renewal along a developmental trajectory in single cells, inferred by marker expression and pseudotime trajectories.

Text 213
10.1136/annrheumdis-2019-215926
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 5 identification of degenerated meniscus progenitor cells (degp) as a key element for meniscus degeneration. (a, b) monocle pseudotime trajectory showing the progression of fcp, profc, cpc and degp. (c) from the centre to the left of the heatmap, the kinetic curve from the root along the trajectory to fate 1. starting from the right, the curve from the root to fate 2. fcp markers mylk and mcam, degp markers gas1, rab3b and cdcp1 and cpc markers cdk1 and birc5 expressed from the root to each branch. (d) pseudotime kinetics of indicated genes from the root of the trajectory to fate 1 (solid line) and the cells up to fate 2 (dashed line). (e) representative ihc staining of mylk, gas1 and dner in healthy human meniscus and degenerated meniscus, and quantification of positive cells. scale bar, 50µm. n=6, p<0.01. (f) healthy human meniscus cells were treated with 5ng/ml il-1β for 48hours or 96hours. phosphate buffer saline (pbs) was used as a negative control. cd146 and cd318 expression was determined by flow cytometry. n≥5, versus control, p<0.05; & versus il-1β (48hours), p<0.05. cpc, cartilage progenitor cells; dep, degenerated meniscus progenitor cell; fcp, fibrochondrocyte progenitors; profc, proliferate fibrochondrocytes.']. Reference sentences:[]
Summary: Trajectory analysis reveals the progression of different cell types in meniscus degeneration, with specific gene expressions marking each branch.

Text 214
10.1136/annrheumdis-2019-215926
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 3 single-\\xadcell trajectory branch points demonstrating fcp differentiation. (a, b) monocle pseudotime trajectory showing the progression of fcp, profc, fc, prehtc and regc. (c) the expression of the genes in a branch-d\\xad ependent manner. each row indicates the standardised kinetic curves of a gene. the centre of the heatmap shows the kinetic curve value at the root of the trajectory. from the centre to the left of the heatmap, the kinetic curve progresses from the root along the trajectory to fate 1. starting from the right, the curve from the root to fate 2. (d) pseudotime kinetics of indicated genes from the root of the trajectory to fate 1 (solid line) and the cells up to fate 2 (dashed line). (e) safranine o/fast green staining and immunohistochemistry staining of col1a1 and mylk in mice anterior meniscus at 1, 2, 3, 4, 8, 26 and 52 weeks, and quantification of positive cells (n≥3). scale bar, 100µm. cpc, cartilage progenitor cells; ec, endothelial cells; fc, fibrochondrocytes; fcp, fibrochondrocyte progenitors; prehtc, prehypertrophic chondrocytes; profc, proliferate fibrochondrocytes; regc, regulatory chondrocytes.']. Reference sentences:[]
Summary: Gene expression patterns along a single-cell trajectory representing differentiation from progenitor to mature cell types.

Text 215
10.1038/s41597-019-0351-8
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 3 subpopulations of pt cells and reconstructing the developmental trajectory of pt cells. (a) violin plots representing the expression of marker genes in pt cells. clusters 1, 2 and 3 refer to the proximal convoluted tubule, proximal tubule and proximal straight tubule, respectively. (b) monocle2-generated pseudotemporal trajectory of three pt cell types (n=20,308); imported seurat data are coloured according to the cell name designation. (c) pseudotime was coloured in a gradient from dark to light blue, and the start of pseudotime is dark. (d) the pseudotime trajectory was divided into three different states by monocle2. (e) the trajectory showing the distribution of cells from three samples. (f) the top six genes influencing fate decisions are shown as line plots displayed as the expression level over pseudotime by monocle2. (g) heat map for clustering the top 50 genes that affected cell fate decisions. these 50 genes were divided into three clusters (cluster 1, cluster 2 and cluster 3), showing genes at the beginning stage, the transitory stage and the end stage of the developmental trajectory, respectively.']. Reference sentences:[]
Summary: Trajectory analysis reveals gene expression changes over pseudotime in different cell states, influencing fate decisions in single-cell populations.

Text 216
10.1016/j.immuni.2019.11.014
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 3. dissection of transcriptional states and differentiation trajectories in cd4+ tconv and treg cells a total of 45,640 cd4+ t cells were recovered from all samples, with 41,889 cd4+ tconv and 3,751 treg cells. (a and b) (a) tconv cells were separated into 7 clusters by dragon. (b) same fitsne as (a) but colored by sample types (left panel) and showing enrichment of samples in clusters (right panel). (c) three-dimensional diffusion map embedding of all cd4+ tconv samples reveals a branching between cd4+ tconv cells from hpv+ and hpv– tils. (d) two-dimensional regression planes show the differences in trajectories for cd4+ tconv cells from hpv– and hpv+ tils. (e) heatmap showing the top 50 differentially expressed genes from clusters 1 and 7, the two terminal branches by diffusion analysis. cluster 1 is associated with at t follicular helper (tfh) phenotype, whereas cluster 7 has an effector memory phenotype. (f and g) (f) we identified 6 clusters of cd4+ treg cells from all patients. (g) same fitsne as (f) but with cells colored by sample types (left panel) and enrichment of samples in clusters (right panel). the majority (89%) of cd4+ treg cells were derived from tils. (h) gene set enrichment revealed ifn-responsive clusters (2 and 4) and clusters enriched for tnf signaling (3 and 6). (i) diffusion map embedding of cd4+ treg cells from hpv– and hpv+ tils revealed a consistent differentiation trajectory. (j) the density of cd4+ treg cells along the dc1 axis was similar for hpv– and hpv+ tils, but a slightly higher frequency of cd4+ treg cells from hpv– tils were earlier on the differentiation trajectory versus hpv+ tils.']. Reference sentences:[in contrast to cd8+ t cells visualization of the first 3 dimensions of the result- ing diffusion map yielded a branching trajectory (dc1; figure 3c; table s5).we next fit regression planes between dc1 dc2 and dc3 for cd4+ tconv cells derived from hpv– and hpv+ tils and found dramatically different differentiation planes between tu- mor types (figure 3d).top differentially ex- pressed genes between clusters 1 and 7 uncovered tfh-related genes associated with cluster 1 and activation inf response and memory genes associated with cluster 7 (figure 3e).we next evaluated the genes associated with each of the diffu- sion components and found a strong association between expression of cxcr5 and pdcd1 with dc1 consistent with the proposed tfh signature of these cells (figure 3e).we next performed gene set enrichment analysis to characterize the general biolog- ical activities in each cluster (figure 3h; table s4).diffusion map embedding of cd4+ treg cells revealed that dpt was strongly correlated with dc1 (figure 3i; figure s5b; ta- ble s5).there was a subtle difference in the density of hpv– versus hpv+ til treg cells along the dc1 axis with more treg cells from hpv– tils at earlier dpts (figure 3j).overlapping enrichment of cell cycle and germinal center gene sets implies that clusters 3 and 4 are centroblasts consistent with rapidly −0.04 −0.03 −0.02 −0.01 0.00 0.01 0.02 −0.03 −0.02 −0.01 0.00 0.01 0.02 −0.03 −0.02 −0.01 0.00 0.01 0.02 dc1 dc3 dc2 fitsne_2 conventional cd4+ t cells a b tse( r%) ulc nih encirhmen twti ed b ynumbe ro fpaeitnst) zila norm ( hd pbmc hd tonsil hnscc hpv– pbmc hnscc hpv– til hnscc hpv+ pbmc hnscc hpv+ til 100 75 50 25 0 1 5 2 3 4 6 7 scaled expression -2 -1 0 1 2 regulatory cd4+ t cells f 100 75 50 25 0 1 2 3 4 -0.02 0 dc1 0.02 h i scaled z-scores tse( r%) ulc nih encirhmen twti ed b ynumbe ro fpaeitnst) zila norm ( hnscc hpv– til hnscc hpv+ til til density dc1 axis fitsne_1 50 -50 0 -50 50 0 fitsne_2 fitsne_1 50 -50 0 -50 50 0 1 4 3 5 7 6 2 c fitsne_2 fitsne_1 40 -40 0 -40 40 0 1 4 3 2 5 6 fitsne_2 -40 40 0 g fitsne_1 40 -40 0 hd pbmc hd tonsil hnscc hpv– pbmc hnscc hpv– til hnscc hpv+ pbmc hnscc hpv+ til 5 6 clusters 7-effector memory -2 -1 0 1 2 clusters 1-cycling 2-ifn response 3-tnf signaling 5-resting 6-tnf signaling il-2 signaling up (marzec) cell cycle (kegg) cell cycle (reactome) tnf targets up (phong) tnf signaling via nfκb (tian) hypoxia up (elvidge) response to lps up (nemeth) ifn response genes (browne) ifn induced antiviral module (bosco) dc1 0.02 0 0 -0.02 0.02 dc2 0.04 -0.04 0.04 -0.02 -0.04 hd pbmc hd tonsil hnscc hpv– pbmc hnscc hpv+ pbmc hnscc hpv+ til hnscc hpv– til pdcd1 cxcl13 tigit tox maf cxcr5 cd40lg il6st klf2 ccl5 il7r nfkbia irf1 fos cd69 socs3 ifi6 isg15 e 4-ifn response 0.02 -0.02 0.00 0.00 0.02 −0.02 0.00 0.02 dc1 dc3 -0.02 -0.04 0.00 0.02 −0.02 0.00 0.02 dc1 dc3 -0.02 -0.04 dc2 0.02 -0.02 0.00 dc2 hpv– cd4+ tconv til hpv+ cd4+ tconv til d j 1-tfh effector figure 3.(g and h) celltalker was used to identify putative interactions between the 7 clusters of cd4+ tconv cells (figure 3; cd4-1 to cd4-7) and 11 clusters of b cells (figure 4; b-1 to b-11) identified by dragon.(i) pfs analysis based on gene set enrichment for the tfh signature (defined in figure 3e) from hnscc patients from the tcga.]
Summary: Differentiation trajectories of CD4+ T cells from HPV+ and HPV- tumors were visualized, revealing distinct gene expression patterns associated with specific cell phenotypes.

Text 217
10.1016/j.immuni.2019.11.014
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 2. cd8+ t cells share a differentiation trajectory toward co-expression of inhibitory receptors between hpv– and hpv+ tils a total of 32,734 cd8+ t cells were recovered across all samples. (a) clustering of cd8+ t cells by dragon revealed a total of 8 clusters across all samples. (b) enrichment of clusters by sample types showed that clusters 1–4 were predominantly of til origin; whereas clusters 5–7 were composed of mixtures of pbmc, tonsil, and til; and cluster 8 was predominantly til. (c) differential gene expression analysis revealed signature genes associated with each cluster. specifically, cluster 1 expressed genes associated with the cell cycle, cluster 2 was associated with inf responses, and clusters 3 and 4 expressed immune checkpoints.']. Reference sentences:[a total of 8 clusters were derived following dragon clustering (figure 2a; table s3).cd8+ t cells from tils were most frequently found in clusters 1–4 whereas those from pbmcs and tonsils were more frequently found in clusters 5–8 (figure 2b) although there was also a notable overlap between pbmc and til populations in some clusters.we next performed differential gene expression analysis and found distinct sets of genes governing each cluster (figure 2c).interestingly we found that the clus- ters containing exhausted cd8+ t cells differed in several ways such as upregulation of co-simulation in cluster 3 and hypoxia signaling and inf responses in cluster 4 (figure 2d; table s4).the resulting two-dimensional diffusion map embedding uncovered a smooth trajectory that linked pbmcs to tils (fig- ure 2e; table s5) and that overlapped for hpv+ and hpv– tils (figure 2f).]
Summary: Differentiation trajectory of CD8+ T cells towards co-expression of inhibitory receptors, with distinct gene expression patterns in clusters.

Text 218
10.1016/j.stem.2019.12.005
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 2. distinct phases of spermatogonial proliferation and differentiation during human puberty (a) focused analysis (tsne and clustering) of the germ cells (clusters c1, c2, and c3 from figure 1c) reveals developmental progression of spermatogenesis during puberty. cells are colored based on the ages/donors of origin. (b) expression patterns of known spermatogenic markers projected onto the tsne plot from figure 2a. (c) pseudotime trajectory (monocle analysis) of the germ cells. cells are colored based according to the predicted pseudotime. (d) deconvolution of the monocle pseudotime plot according to ages/donors of origin. (e) relative proportion of the single cells at different spermatogenic stages in the samples analyzed.']. Reference sentences:[interestingly germ cells from both the 1- and 7-year-old samples consisted of only undifferentiated spermatogonia (corresponding to states 0–1) (figures 2a 2d and 2e) that expressed utf1 and other early germline stem cell markers (figure 2b; figures s2a and s2b).last germ cell composition in the 14-year-old sample resem- bled the adult indicating nearly full spermatogenesis (figure 2e).]
Developmental progression of spermatogenesis during puberty, from undifferentiated spermatogonia to nearly full spermatogenesis.

Text 219
10.1038/s41588-019-0566-9
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 4 | evolution of mutant kras amplifications. a, contour plot of germline snp ratio and copy number (cn) of pcsi_0729; the pattern indicates a tetraploid11. b, representative plot of chr. 12 showing amplification of mutant kras (at ~25mb). amplification of the mutant allele occurs as a large segment of the parm (segment a). copy number (cn, top) and germline snps ratios (bottom) are shown. c, density plot of the mutated copies of somatic mutations on segmenta in pcsi_0729. three sets of mutations are observed (a–c). gd, genome doubling. d, representation of how mutation sets (a–c) were acquired through evolution (details in supplementary fig 9). e, evolutionary trajectory of mutant kras imbalance in pcsi_0729. known molecular timepoints (black circles) were calculated based on mutated copies of somatic mutations. when we were unable to determine the exact molecular time due to loss of information (that is, loss of wt allele), predicted locations (white circles) are depicted in relation to known events. f, top: proportion of mutant kras imbalance (balanced, minor and major) in diploid (dip) and tetraploid (tetr) tumors segregated by cohort and clinical stage. pvalues from fisher’s exact test (major versus rest); nvalues for each subgroup shown on the plots. bottom: number of structural variants in diploid and tetraploid tumors. box-whisker plots show median and first/third quartiles with minimum/maximum points. pvalues from the two-sided wilcoxon rank-sum test; n=204 (cohort), n=148 (primary) and n=56 (metastatic). g, scatter plot of mutant kras imbalance in diploid (blue dots) and tetraploid (yellow dots) tumors. each dot represents one tumor (n=204; only kras mutants used).']. Reference sentences:[to investigate how the expression signatures from bulk rna-seq dis- tribute intratumorally we performed single-cell rna-seq (scrna- seq) on 15 patient tumors (13 resectable 2 metastatic) (extended data fig 4a).leftover immune cells fibroblasts and endothelial cells were identified using established lineage marker genes (extended data fig 4bc).epithelial cells were identified by lineage antigens using a previous strategy18 (extended data fig 4c).marker genes from the single-cell transcriptome atlas of the normal human pancreas19 were used to discriminate normal from malignant epithelial cells (extended data fig 4de).in support of our strategy rare mutant kras reads and inferred copy number aberrations were observed only in cells defined as tumor (extended data fig 4f–h and supplementary note).in 13 out of 15 tumors both basal-like and classical clusters were found in the same tumor and these cell clusters commonly demarcated distinct tumor cell populations (extended data fig 4i).to demonstrate the principles of the approach we have used a single case of liver metastasis (fig 4a methods and supplementary note).pcsi_0729 was a tetraploid tumor with krasma which occurred through a chromosome arm- level event (fig 4b top segment a).germline snp ratios in this region indicated that the wt allele was lost resulting in four mutant and no wt copies (fig 4b bottom).using the copy numbers of mutations on segment a we identified three distinct clusters of mutations: those on all four copies (including kras mutation (a) those on two copies (b) and those on one copy only (c) (fig 4c)).mutations labeled as (c) are the most recent mutations occurring after the genome doubled (fig 4d step 4).mutations labeled as (b) which reside at a copy number state of 2 occurred on a single copy of dna before the genome doubled (fig 4d steps 3/4).mutations on all four copies of dna labeled (a) occurred on one of the two original parental dna strands that underwent copy-neutral loh followed by genome doubling (fig 4d steps 1–4).we then inferred the molecular time of each evolutionary phase using the three sets of mutations (a–c) (fig 4e).moreover in the entire cohort nearly all tumors with krasma were tetraploid (fig 4f top; fig 4g).]
Summary: Evolutionary trajectory of mutant kras imbalance in tumors, with distinct mutation sets acquired through genome doubling and molecular timepoints inferred from mutations.

Text 220
10.1038/s41588-019-0566-9
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 5 | switch in patient subtype linked to copy number changes in mutant kras. a, compass_0003, initially a resectable patient (left panel), progressed to stageiv within 8weeks of surgery (right: liver metastases). fresh tumor tissue from the resection was subjected to rna-seq, wgs and patientderived xenografting (pdx). at progression, the patient was enrolled in compass and a liver biopsy was obtained. due to extreme necrosis, there was sufficient tumor material for only wgs and rnaish for gata6 (extended data fig 10b). b, compass_0003, summary of subtype change from diagnosis to progression (extended data fig 10a). subtype abbreviations as in fig 1. c, tumor ploidy plots for compass_0003. patterns support that the primary tumor was diploid whereas the liver metastasis was tetraploid. d, trajectory of mutant kras imbalance and change in molecular subtype in compass_0003. k, mutant kras; wgd, whole-genome doubling. e, compass_0064, an advanced-disease patient treated with gemcitabline/nab-paclitaxel (gem/nabpac), responded briefly (18% shrinkage at 16weeks by recist). tumor biopsies were obtained before therapy and at progression (22weeks). biopsies were radiologically mapped to the same region. wgs and rna-seq were performed for both time points. f, summary of the change in subtype from diagnosis to progression in compass_0064 (extended data fig 10a). g, celluloid plots of tumor ploidy for diagnosis (top) and progression (bottom) in compass_0064. patterns support that the diagnostic tumor underwent two genome duplications (ploidy,4.3), whereas the clone that emerged at progression underwent one event only (ploidy,3.0). h, evolutionary trajectory of mutant kras and change in molecular subtype in compass_0064. k, mutant kras; wgd, whole-genome doubling; amp, amplification.']. Reference sentences:[tumors with homologous recombination defects (hrd) and dna mismatch repair deficiency (mmr) were excluded due to their unique mutational signatures (extended data fig 5a).by examin- ing point mutations no gene other than tp53 or gene network was found to be enriched in basal-like-a/b subtypes (extended data fig 5b–f and supplementary note).although no significant changes occurred to the number of snvs/ indels or number of svs (extended data fig 10c) the primary tumor was diploid whereas the metastatic tumor was tetraploid (fig 5c).this diploid clone then sustained a genome-doubling event bringing the mutant kras copy number to 4 (fig 5d).in a second advanced patient compass_0064 (fig 5ef) liver metastases were biopsied before and after chemotherapy from the same radiologic region.however as with compass_0003 there was a dramatic shift in tumor ploidy: that of the diagnostic tumor was consistent with two genome doublings (4.3) whereas that of the post-therapy tumor suggested only a single genome dou- bling (3.0) (fig 5g).again this shift from krasma to krasba was accom- panied by a change in subtype (fig 5h) probably driven by out- growth of a minor clone.mmr and dsbr tumours were identified and excluded (extended figure 5a) from genomic analysis of the subtypes because they are outliers.]
Summary: Trajectories of mutant kras imbalance and subtype changes in single cells were observed during disease progression.

Text 221
10.1016/j.stem.2019.12.007
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 2. single-cell analysis of days 5–50 developmental trajectories and cellular composition of day 50 nmos (a) umap plot of integrated days 5 and 50 datasets. the 4 main cell clusters at day 5 are colored, whereas day 50 cells are gray. dots represent individual cells and colors indicate cluster identity. related to table s2. (b) umap plot of the day 50 nmo cells revealed 5 main cell clusters. dots represent individual cells, and colors indicate cluster identity. (c) velocity field overlaid with the umap plot showing the developmental trajectories that days 5 and 50 cells follow. colors indicate the different cell-cycle phases: g1, orange; s, green; and g2-m, blue. the main developmental trajectories are shown with colored arrows: blue for the neural lineage and red for the skeletal muscle lineage. density plot of day 5 (dark gray) and day 50 (light gray) single cells with colored arrows show the main developmental trajectories that single cells follow as they commit to specific lineages.']. Reference sentences:[umap analysis of day 50 nmos suggested the presence of 5 broad cell populations (figure 2b) 1 neural population (blue) and 4 mesodermal-derived populations corre- sponding to skeletal muscle (red) epithelial (brown) endothelial (black) and sclerotome/cartilage (orange) cells (figures 2a and 2b; table s2).cell-cycle analysis of single cells as they transit from day 5 to day 50 revealed that most day 5 cells were in s and g2/m phases while day 50 cells were mostly in g1 phase (figure 2c).rna velocity unveiled the dynamics and directionality of differ- entiation trajectories (figure 2c) (la manno et al. 2018).in the skeletal muscle trajectory day 5 mesodermal progenitors gave rise to myogenic progenitor/satellite-like cells (cluster 1 fig- ure 2d) which then differentiated through myocytes (cluster 2 figure 2d) to contractile skeletal muscle cells (cluster 3 fig- ures 2d and 2e).in the neural trajectory day 5 neuroectodermal progenitors gave rise to neural progenitors (cluster 4 figure 2d) which differentiated through immature neurons (cluster 5 figure 2d) into mature spinal cord neurons (cluster 6 figure 2d).in addi- tion day 5 neuroectodermal cells gave rise to trunk neural crest derivatives (cluster 7 figure 2d) as well as glia and schwann cells (cluster 8 figures 2d and 2f).to determine whether the different populations were repro- ducibly generated in different nmos and batches we clustered all of the cells of the individual batches and aligned them with the cell populations found in individual nmos (figure 2g).]
Developmental trajectories of single cells transitioning from day 5 to day 50, revealing lineage commitment patterns.

Text 222
10.15252/emmm.201910606
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 6. single microglia sequencing demonstrates a strong arm response in apptg in comparison with tautg mice. a umap clustering of sorted cd11b+/cd45+ myeloid cells from mouse hippocampus. arm: activated response microglia; cam: cns-associated macrophages; cpm: cycling and proliferating microglia; hm.1: homeostatic microglia cluster 1; hm.2: homeostatic microglia cluster 2; irm: interferon-response microglia; mhc.high: high mhc-expressing microglia; mnc: monocytes; trm: transitioning microglia. b distribution of cells across the different clusters per experimental group (n = 2 mice pooled for all experimental groups, except for tautg-11m and tauwt-11m with n = 3 mice pooled). c distribution of cells per experimental group over the different clusters, expressed in percentages as stated on top of each bar. e.g., of all cells within apptg-11m, 56.7% of cells are arm, while 12.5% are hm.1 cells. d scorpius-based ranking of all cells on a pseudotime from homeostatic to activated microglia. whereas all cells within the wt groups are clustered within the homeostatic part of the pseudotime trajectory, apptg-4m and apptg-11m mice demonstrate a shift toward more activated microglia. e differential expression of arm versus hm.1 microglia for apptg and tautg mice separately. genes with a positive log(fold change; lfc) are more highly expressed in arms compared to hm.1 microglia; genes with a negative lfc are more highly expressed in hm.1 compared to arm cells. as can be seen genes that are significantly differentially expressed between arm and hm.1 cells are highly similar among apptg and tautg mice (spearman correlation r = 0.91, p = 2.2e-16). lfc > |0.2| with padj < 0.05 is considered significant. f predicted contribution of microglial expression of each of the top 18 genes to the observed bulk rna-seq expression data, based on linear regression (see materials and methods). for 16/18 genes, the microglial expression contributes significantly and 67% or more to the observed expression from the bulk rna-seq. benjamini– yekutieli-adjusted p-value (padj) < 0.001; padj < 0.01; padj < 0.05.']. Reference sentences:[nine dif- ferent clusters were obtained (see fig 6a) and after matching the expression of their marker genes with publicly available gene sets (see appendix fig s4; friedman et al 2018; mancuso et al 2019a; sala frigerio et al 2019) were termed activated response microglia (arm n = 2841 cells) cns-associated macrophages (cams n = 720) cycling and proliferating microglia (cpm n = 285 see dataset ev6 for a list of marker genes) homeostatic microglia clus- ter 1 (hm.1 n = 7111) homeostatic microglia cluster 2 (hm.2 n = 2895) interferon-response microglia (irm n = 387) high major histocompatibility complex-expressing microglia (mhc.high n = 144 see dataset ev6 for a list of marker genes) monocytes (mnc n = 100) and transitioning response microglia (trm n = 1115).when assessing the distribution of cells of each experimental group over the different clusters it becomes apparent that the ratio of hm (hm.1 and hm.2) versus arm is vastly different among the experimental groups (fig 6b and c appendix fig s5).when placing all microglial cells on a pseudotime trajectory using scorpius (fig 6d preprint: cannoodt et al 2016) it becomes clear that wt microglia stay within the homeostatic state.in tautg mice however such an extreme phenotypic shift is not observed with few arm cells reaching the final stage of activation in tautg-11m mice (fig 6d).when comparing all arm cells to all hm cells within the apptg and the tautg mice and using spearman correlation with the results from the differential expression (fig 6e) it is clear that the overall arm phenotype between apptg and tautg mice is not different (spearman correlation r = 0.91 p = 2.2e-16; see also dataset ev7) with increased expression of apoe ccl4 ccl3 clec7a and lyz2 and downregulation of homeostatic markers p2ry12 tmem119 and nav2.ª 2020 the authors embo molecular medicine e10606 | 2020 9 of 18 annerieke sierksma et al embo molecular medicine a d e f b c figure 6.using the regression coefficient r2 and the benjamini–yekutieli-adjusted p- value we conclude that the bulk rna-seq expression pattern for clu and slc2a5 cannot be explained by the expression of these genes in microglia (padj < 0.05 see fig 6f).]
Summary: Trajectory analysis reveals a shift from homeostatic to activated microglia in apptg mice, with similar gene expression patterns between apptg and tautg mice.

Text 223
10.1242/dev.183251
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure s6. identification and characterization of leydig cells during the perinatal stage. (a) umap plot of leydig cells (annotated from fig 1a) from e18.5, p2, and p7 mouse testes. left, leydig cell clusters; right, sample source. arrow shows the predicted developmental direction. (b) heatmap of apoptosis-associated genes from different stages of leydig cells. (c) monocle pseudotime trajectory analysis of the leydig cell clusters defined in (a). left, leydig cell clusters; right, developmental stage information. (d) heatmap of differentially expressed genes (degs) from different leydig cell clusters following the trajectory timeline shown in (c). top, pseudotime direction; right, the number of degs and the representative biological processes and pvalues in each group. (e) gene network of enriched transcription factors (tfs) identified from gene group 2 in (d).']. Reference sentences:[]
Summary: Trajectory analysis reveals developmental progression of Leydig cells, with gene expression changes and enriched transcription factors along the pseudotime trajectory.

Text 224
10.1016/j.cell.2019.11.038
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 5. non-venomous organoid cells include wnt-active proliferating cells (a) expression levels of mki67 and rnf43 in t-sne map (color coded logarithmic scale of transcript expression). (b) violin plot of mki67 and rnf43 expression levels in cells from expansion medium (yellow) or differentiation medium (purple). (c) changes in organoid gene expression levels after 10 day wnt activation (addition of rspo and rspo plus exogenous wnt3a). expression levels were determined by qpcr and shown relative to ‘‘no rspo and no wnt3a exposure,’’ normalized to actb. (d) schematic overview of a. l. cowlesi lgr5 protein and alignment of r-spondin-interacting residues with the human amino acid sequence. (e) representative bright field images of organoids grown for 14 days with (+rspo3) or without (àrspo3) r-spondin in culture medium. scale bars, 2,000 mm (upper panels) and 400 mm (lower panels). (f) ordering of cells from single cell sequencing data along a pseudotemporal trajectory using monocle. (g) position of cells exposed to expansion medium (yellow) or differentiation medium (purple) for 7 days along the pseudotemporal trajectory. (h) position of cells belonging to the 12 different clusters along the pseudotemporal trajectory.']. Reference sentences:[cell 180 233–247 january 23 2020 239 progenitor cells (7 8 9) t-sne1 t-sne2 mki67 rnf43 a expression level 0.0 0.6 expression level 0 5 rnf43 mki67 c b e l gr 5 a sc l2 a xi n2 10 day wnt stimulation 1 904 aspidelaps lubricus cowlesi leucine-rich repeat transmembrane helix lqslrldanhi lqslrldanhi lvvlhlnnr lvvlhlnnr h. sapiens a. l. cowlesi rspo1 interacting residues lgr5 - rspo3 + rspo3 d expansion medium differentiation medium (7 days) f g component 1 -10 -5 0 5 10 15 component 2 -4 0 4 8 pseudotime 0 10 20 component 1 -10 -5 0 5 10 15 component 2 -4 0 4 8 differentiation expansion h component 1 -10 -5 0 5 10 15 component 2 -4 0 4 8 cluster 987654321 10 11 12 0 .5 1 2 4 8 1 6 3 2 6 4 mki67 rnf43 tcf7l2 +rspo3 +wnt3a +rspo3 relative normalized gene expression differentiation medium expansion medium organoid dissociation 15 days 0 200 400 600 expansion medium differentiation medium na organoid diameter day 15 (μm) i j -0.5 -3 2 -2 figure 5.as expected stimulation of the wnt pathway also induced the proliferation marker mki67 (figure 5c).a. l. cowlesi lgr5 shares the same leucine-rich repeats and transmembrane helices with high conservation in the r-spondin interacting residues (r144 d146 v213 v214 and h216) compared to the human protein (figure 5d) (chen et al. 2013).a bifurcation was formed by the ep-sup cells of cluster 5 and tox cells from clusters 1 2 3 and 4 (figure 5f–5h).]
Patterns related to cell trajectory were identified using pseudotemporal analysis, showing differentiation and expansion along the trajectory in single-cell data.

Text 225
10.1038/s41467-019-14256-1
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 3 trajectory analysis of uveal melanoma cells. a enriched transcription factor motifs determined using scenic analysis of 8,598 tumor cells and displayed as a heatmap of z-scored enrichment values. b monocle 2 trajectory analysis of 7,947 uveal melanoma cells obtained by 5′ gene expression chemistry annotated by calculated states. c trajectory analysis annotated by sample and overlaid with color by gep class. d combined monocle 2 trajectory analysis displayed by each sample and annotated by calculated state. e chart depicting pathways found to be significant by msigdb analysis of each sample cluster determined by beam analysis followed by hierarchical clustering.']. Reference sentences:[interestingly among the 12 genes comprising the validated gep clinical prognostic test11 five are expressed predominantly in tumor cells as expected (eif1b htr2b ecm1 cdh1 and robo1) but one is expressed predominantly in t cells (satb1) and the remaining six are expressed in both tumor and immune cells (supplemen- tary fig 3 and supplementary data 1).the most over- represented motifs include those for oncoproteins myc and jun as well as the bhlh-pas hypoxia-associated transcription factor arnt all of which are enriched in cells of class 2 tumors (fig 3a).16) which reconstructs putative branching transcriptional trajectories to identify potential relationships across calculated states (fig 3b–d and supplementary fig 5 6).at the level of individual samples cells from class 1 tumors are enriched in states 1-414-16 and those from class 2 tumors in states 5-13 (fig 3d) confirming the class 1/class 2 partition as a fundamental feature of the global mole- cular landscape of um.we then analyzed the trajectories of each sample individually with monocle 2 using branched expression analysis modeling (beam) and hierarchical clustering to identify genes enriched across states (fig 3e supplementary fig 6 and supplementary data 2).hierarchical clustering was conducted on the rna averaged clusters with immune cell genes aggregated from the literature3233 and visualized using a heatmap (fig 3 supplementary fig 3)34.]
Summary: Trajectory analysis reveals gene expression patterns across different cell states, highlighting tumor and immune cell distinctions in uveal melanoma.

Text 226
10.1038/s41598-020-58327-6
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 3. cell type and single-cell trajectory analysis. (a,b) clustering results visualized with umap and colored by inferred cell type for drop-seq and dronc-seq. (c,d) expression of marker genes overlaid on umap plots from a and b for drop-seq and dronc-seq. (e) pearson correlation of dronc-seq and drop-seq pseudo-bulk against bulk rna-seq from ipscs (n=18), ipsc-cardiomyocytes (n=51), and primary heart tissue (n=22)18. (f,g) distribution of cell types per time-point in drop-seq and dronc-seq, respectively. (h,i) inferred trajectories using monocle with color representing inferred cell types. a total of 3500 cells were used for the trajectory corresponding to 700 per time-point.']. Reference sentences:[]
Summary: Cell type and trajectory analysis based on clustering, marker gene expression, correlation with bulk RNA-seq, distribution of cell types per time-point, and inferred trajectories using Monocle.

Text 227
10.1038/s41467-020-14457-z
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 5 identification of molecular markers for differentiation efficiency. a variation in differentiation efficiency across cell lines. left: differentiation progress over time, showing trajectories for 98 cell lines, coloured by differentiation efficiency. shown are 98 cell lines with sufficient data at all time points (out of 126, more than 10 cells). differentiation efficiency of a cell line was defined as the average pseudotime across all cells on day 3.']. Reference sentences:[following quality control (qc) 36044 cells were retained for downstream analysis across which 11231 genes were expressed (supplemen- tary fig 5; methods).as a measure of differentiation effi- ciency in our experiments we used average pseudotime on day3 and observed significant variation across cell lines which was consistent across replicate differentiations of the same cell line (fig 5a).as an example the expression of zdhhc9 in ipscs was negatively associated with differentiation efficiency (fig 5b).higher expression of these genes was associated with reduced differentiation efficiency (fig 5b; methods).]
Patterns of differentiation efficiency trajectories across different cells, with some genes negatively associated with efficiency.

Text 228
10.1016/j.celrep.2020.01.007
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 4. scrnaeq of early retinal organoids (a) differentiation protocol highlighting the order and timing of retinal organoid development. (b and c) retinal organoids at 30 days primarily express prog markers (vsx2/sox2; c). by 40 days, whole-mount staining shows otx2+ cells migrating in the neuroepithelial layer, and a small patch of rpe also expresses otx2 (b, middle panel). rgcs appear (brn3/pax6) at 30–40 days (c, middle panel). by 70 days, rcvrn+ prs are seen in the apical layers, and brn3+ rgcs occupy the basal layers, as seen in the whole mount (b, right panel) and sections (c, right panel). (d) umap plot showing 5 major clusters at day 60: progs, t1, retinal ganglion cells (rgcs), transition cells 2/acs/hcs (t2acs/hcs), and transition cells 3 (t3) and early cone prs. inset: the feature plots used to identify clusters. (e) pseudotime analysis by monocle2.99, showing cell ordering with prog cells at the root. (e0) slingshot analysis showing similar ordering of cells. trajectory analysis shows that atoh7 expression (y axis) is highest in t1 cells (bump in red line) as cells go from progs to differentiated cell types. (f) integration of organoid (d45, d60) scrna datasets with the fd59 dataset (seurat3); cells were reclustered and replotted.']. Reference sentences:[there are fewer rgcs (gold) and progenitors (cornﬂower blue sox2+) than in the earlier samples (figure 4) and relatively more prs (figure 5e magenta).]
Summary: Trajectory analysis reveals cell ordering from progenitors to differentiated cell types, with highest Atoh7 expression in T1 cells. Integration of datasets shows changes in cell composition over time.

Text 229
10.1016/j.celrep.2020.01.007
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 2. scrnaseq analysis of fd82 retina highlights three transition zones (a) if of central and peripheral fd78 fetal retina (top panels), showing prs/bcs (otx2+ cells in the onl and inl and rcvrn+ cells in the onl) rgcs (huc/d+ cells in the gcl), acs (tfap2a+), and hcs; the ipl is labeled with vglut1. peripheral retina shows a rudimentary pr layer (otx2+/ rcvrn+) but no bcs and no defined inl or plexiform layers. scale bars, 50 mm. (b) umap plot of fd82 central retina. right panels: feature plots showing the expression of genes characteristic of progs and transition populations in blue. (c) heatmap showing markers of the three transition states. (d and d0) monocle pseudotime plot with progs at the root state and lineages drawn across clusters. cells shown in gray (rgcs and hcs) were excluded from the trajectory by monocle. (e) slingshot analysis plotting t2-specific prdm13 expression along the amacrine lineage and t3-specific fabp7 and dll3 along the pr lineage. (f) summary of the transition populations and trajectories seen in central retina at fd82.']. Reference sentences:[this algorithm arranges cells based on pseudotime figure 2. scrnaseq analysis of fd82 retina highlights three transition zones (a) if of central and peripheral fd78 fetal retina (top panels) showing prs/bcs (otx2+ cells in the onl and inl and rcvrn+ cells in the onl) rgcs (huc/d+ cells in the gcl) acs (tfap2a+) and hcs; the ipl is labeled with vglut1.in the next phase of development of the human retina (figure 2 fd82) the progenitor cells in the central retina have started to 1646 cell reports 30 1644–1659 february 4 2020 generate later-born retinal cell types including cells that express markers of bipolar cells (otx2/rcvrn in the inner nuclear layer [inl]) photoreceptors (otx2/rcvrn in the outer nuclear layer [onl]) and m€uller glia (sox2 in the inl) (hoshino et al. 2017); however the peripheral retina is still dominated by progenitors (sox2) and rgc amacrine or horizontal cells (ap2a/huc/d) (figure 2a).we carried out scrna-seq at fd82 for the central temporal (fd82c) retina (a region that contains the presumptive fovea); the cells form several distinct clusters (figure 2b).the cell clusters can be identified by their characteristic pattern of gene expression and the relative numbers of cells of each type approximately match the expected proportions from the if re- sults (figure 2b feature plots).further anal- ysis of these 3 transition states allows for the identification of additional genes co-expressed by transition cells (figure 2c; table s3).interest- ingly the umap plot also shows that the rgcs and hcs (gray figure 2d) are separate from the other cell transition populations presumably because they are no longer being generated in the central retina.the results of the slingshot analysis are shown in figure 2e; the transition states are again ordered between the progenitor cells and the differentiated neurons with t1 cells less mature than t2 or t3 cells.our overall results at this age are summarized in figure 2f.]
Summary: Trajectory analysis reveals transition zones and cell differentiation patterns in the central retina at fd82.

Text 230
10.1016/j.celrep.2020.01.007
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 1. scrnaseq of fd59 retina (a) if of fd59 retina comparing temporal central retina versus periphery, showing rgcs (ganglion cell layer [gcl], huc/d+ and pax6+) and progenitors (neuroblast layer [nbl], sox2+) and some acs, hcs (ap2a+/onecut2+), and prs (otx2+) in the onl. progenitor cells predominate in peripheral retina. (b) umap plot of fd59 retina, recolored and showing major cell types: progenitors (progs), transition zone 1 (t1), rgcs, amacrine/horizontal cells (acs/hcs) and cones (prs). right panels: feature plots show expression of some of the genes used to define clusters. (c) in situ hybridization for atoh7 at low (left) and high (right) magnification (top panel) and if for atoh7 (red), vsx2 (blue), and scng (green). arrows indicate atoh7+ and vsx2/ sncgà cells. (d) pseudotime trajectory with progs at the root (dark blue loop) and differentiated cells (yellow). (e) trajectory analysis from slingshot, with atoh7 expression plotted along the individual lineages using umap coordinates. t1 cluster cells are plotted in blue, and atoh7 expression is marked as a solid black line. (f) heatmap highlighting genes present in the t1 cluster. scale bars, 50 mm. onl, outer nuclear layer.']. Reference sentences:[figure 1a shows sections of both central (presumptive foveal region) and peripheral retina at this age.dissociation scrna-seq and uniform manifold approximation and projection (umap) clustering in seurat (becht et al. 2018; butler et al. 2018) allowed identifi- cation of the major cell classes with rela- tive numbers closely reﬂecting the immu- noﬂuorescence (if) analysis (figure 1b; tables s1 and s2).the differentiated neuron populations show similar ratios as the if results; ganglion cells are the most abundant making up approximately one-third of to- tal cells whereas amacrine cells and horizontal cells are the next most abundant and otx2+ photoreceptors were the least abun- dant of the differentiated neurons (figure 1b; figure s1a).figure 1c (top) shows in situ hybridization for atoh7 in human retina at fd59 with a similar distribution of labeled cells as reported in mice.atoh7-expressing cells are located in the nbl but not the gan- glion cell layer (figure 1c top right).to further explore this possibility we used monocle 2.99 software to reorder the cells based on their stage-specific gene expression patterns and reconstructed their developmental timelines (figure 1d; cao et al. 2019; trapnell et al. 2014).interestingly a tra- jectory analysis of individual lineages positioned the t1 cells between progeni- tor cells and the differentiated neuronal populations (figure 1d).in addition to high atoh7 expression cells in the t1 pop- ulation have high levels of the notch pathway components hes6 and dll3 (figure 1f; table s2).]
Summary: Trajectory analysis reveals differentiation from progenitor cells to differentiated cells, with t1 cells positioned between them, marked by atoh7 expression.

Text 231
10.1016/j.devcel.2020.01.009
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 4. trajectory analysis supports that car4 ecs originate from plvap ecs at e19 (a) tsne plots of scrna-seq from purified lung ecs over time, with the populations identified as in figure 3 and their percentages shown in parenthesis. car4 ecs were first detected at e19. plvap ecs, but not car4 ecs, are proliferative (mki67).']. Reference sentences:[to investigate the ontogeny of car4 ecs we performed scrna-seq on 851 e17 and 1570 e19 lung ecs (figure 4a).monocle trajectory analysis (qiu et al. 2017) showed that plvap ecs at e17 matured over time and a subset of them became car4 ecs along a distinct trajectory (figure 4b).one gene group showed upregulation before car4 ecs fully matured and interestingly included kdr (or vegfr2) the major receptor for vegfa which might confer a higher sensitivity to vegfa signaling to specify car4 ecs (figure 4c; table s3).]
Patterns related to the differentiation trajectory of lung endothelial cells, specifically the transition from plvap to car4 endothelial cells.

Text 232
10.1038/s41586-020-2024-3
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 3e). this revealed that the neural and mesodermal differentiation trajectories in gastruloids are linked to their anterior–posterior axis, which is consistent with what occurs in embryos8,9. additionally, we found that the anterior domain in gastruloids (clusters vi, vii and viii) contains cardiac, endothelial and head mesenchymal cells (fig 1b, c, extended data fig 3e). this is consistent with the locations of these tissues in embryos. to further investigate the extent to which anterior–posterior geneexpression patterns in gastruloids recapitulate those in embryos, we applied tomo-seq to e8.5 mouse embryos (fig 1d, extended data figs. 3–6, methods, supplementary tables 5–8). this revealed that mesoderm genes, including genes that regulate somitogenesis, are expressed very similarly between embryos and gastruloids. we detected cardiac and brain domains in embryos (clusters vii and i, respectively, in extended data fig 5b) that are not clearly defined and absent, respectively, in gastruloids. additional differences and similarities between embryos and gastruloids are presented in extended data fig 5, supplementary tables 7, 8, and visualization is provided at https://avolab. hubrecht.eu/mousegastruloids2020. we also compared our gastruloid tomo-seq dataset to a previously published microarray dataset in which the posterior mesoderm (from the tail bud to the newly formed somite) of e9.5 mouse embryos was dissected into 7 anterior–posterior regions']. Reference sentences:[]
Summary: Trajectory patterns of differentiation in single cells are linked to anterior-posterior axis, resembling embryo development.

Text 233
10.1126/science.aay3224
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 2. thymic seeding of early thymic progenitors (etps) and t cell differentiation trajectory. (a) umap visualization of etp and fetal liver hematopoietic stem cells (hscs) and early progenitors. nmp, neutrophilmyeloid progenitor; memp, megakaryocyte/ erythrocyte/mast cell progenitor. (b) the same umap colored by organ (liver in blue, thymus in yellow/red). (c) umap visualization of developing thymocytes after batch correction. dn, doublenegative t cells; dp, double-positive t cells; sp, single-positive t cells; p, proliferating; q, quiescent). the data contain cells from all sampled developmental stages. cells from abundant clusters are downsampled for better visualization. the reproducibility of structure is confirmed across individual samples. unconventional t cells are in gray. (d to f) the same umap plot showing cd4, cd8a, and cd8b gene expression (d), cdk1 cell cycle and rag1 recombination gene expression (e), and tcra, productive tcrb, and nonproductive tcrb vdj genes (f). (g) heat map showing differentially expressed genes across t cell differentiation pseudotime. top: the x axis represents pseudo-temporal ordering. gene expression levels across the pseudotime axis are maximum-normalized and smoothed. genes are grouped by their functional categories and expression patterns. bottom: cell type annotation of cells aligned along the pseudotime axis. colors are as in (c). (h) scatterplot showing the rate of productive chain detection within cells in specific cell types (x axis) and the ratio of nonproductive/productive tcr chains']. Reference sentences:[we merged the thymus and liver data and selected clusters including liver hscs/mpps thymic etps and dn thymocytes for data analysis and visualization (fig 2 a and b and fig s12).to investigate the downstream t cell differ- entiation trajectory we selected the t cell pop- ulations and projected them using umap and force-directed graph analysis (fig 2c fig s14a and data s1) which showed a continuous tra- jectory of differentiating t cells.to confirm the validity of this trajectory we overlaid hallmark genes of t cell differentiation: cd4/cd8a/ cd8b genes (fig 2d) cell cycle (cdk1) and recombination (rag1) genes (fig 2e) and fully recombined tcras/tcrbs (fig 2f) (47).park et al. science 367 eaay3224 (2020) 21 february 2020 3 of 11 research | research article the trajectory started from cd4–cd8– dn cells which gradually express cd4 and cd8 to become cd4+cd8+ dp cells and then tran- sitioned through a ccr9high tab(entry) stage to diverge into mature cd4+ or cd8+ sp cells (fig 2d).addi- tional t cell lineages identified in this analysis are discussed below (fig 2c gray).dn and dp cells were separated into two phases by the expression of cell cycle genes (fig 2e).we designated the early population with strong cell cycle signature as proliferating (p) and the later population as quiescent (q) (fig 2c).next we aligned the tcr recombination data to this trajectory (fig 2f).in the dn stage recombined tcrb sequences were de- tected from the late p phase which coincides with an increase in recombination signature and the expression of pre-tcra (ptcra) (fig 2g and fig s15).the ratio of nonproductive to productive recombination events (nonprod- uctivity score) for tcrb was relatively higher in dn stages and dropped to a basal level as park et al. science 367 eaay3224 (2020) 21 february 2020 4 of 11 fig 2.research | research article cells entered dp stages demonstrating the impact of beta selection (fig 2h).in contrast to tcrb non- productive tcra chains were not enriched in the dp(q) cells but rather were depleted (fig 2h).the enrich- ment of pre–beta selection cells in dn(q) cells matches well with the characteristics of isp cd4+ serving as a checkpoint for beta selec- tion (fig 2f and fig s15).to model the development of conventional abt cells in more detail we performed pseudo- time analysis which resulted in an ordering of cells highly consistent with known marker genes and transcription factors (fig 2g).to derive further insights into transcription factors that specify t cell stages and lineages we created a correlation-based transcrip- tion factor network after imputing gene expression (see materials and methods) which demonstrated modules of transcrip- tion factors specific for lineage commitment (fig 2i).development of tregs and unconventional t cells in addition to conventional cd4+ or cd8+ t cells which constitute the majority of t cells in the developing thymus our data identified multiple unconventional t cell types which were grouped by the expression of signature marker genes (fig 2i and fig 3 a and b).axes and coordinates are as in fig 2c.]
Summary: Trajectory of T cell differentiation from early progenitors to mature T cells, characterized by gene expression changes and recombination events.

Text 234
10.1016/j.stem.2019.12.011
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 6. transcriptomics of isc restoration at single-cell resolution (a) uniform manifold approximation and projection (umap) plots from rna analysis of 3,254 individual mch+ regenerating ‘‘upper’’ cells, showing the paucity of lgr5 expression compared with ascl2 and other isc markers, including cdca7 and smoc2. in nearest-neighbor depiction, lgr5à isc-like cells cluster together. expression scales are different for each marker. (b) within the same umap-specified cell groups. top: distributions of actively cycling and non-replicating cells; bottom: expression of +4 ‘‘reserve’’ isc marker genes bmi1 and clu. (c) projection of colonocyte (fabp2, car1) and goblet cell (tff3, muc2) markers on the same umap plot reveals that non-cycling mch+ ‘‘upper’’ cells are similar to mature epithelial cells. (d) hundreds of cells that cluster at the junctions of mature and isc-like cells co-express isc and either colonocyte (e.g., fabp2) or goblet cell (e.g., muc2) markers. in the dedifferentiation context, we therefore consider them bona fide transitional (trans) cells. (e) analysis of scrna-seq data in monocle version 2.12.0 (trapnell et al., 2014). left: depiction of cells along the defined trajectory, color-coded according to categories defined in umap analysis by expression of cell-specific marker genes. inset: iscs, goblet cells, and colonocytes projected separately on the trajectory. right: cells are color-coded according to their imputed pseudotime, with high isc marker-expressing cells as the destination. (f) colonocyte (car1, fabp2), isc (cdca7), and goblet cell (spdef, muc2) marker expression in mature and transitional (trans) plotted along the above-defined pseudotime axis. fall of mature cell, and rise of isc, markers occurs faster in dedifferentiating colonocytes than in goblet cells. in this interpretation, trans colonocytes are fewer than trans goblet cells because the latter dedifferentiate over a longer period. see also figure s6.']. Reference sentences:[isc-restricted genes such as cdca7 and smoc2 (table s2) further delineated distinct isc-like cells (figure 6a).proliferative activity was largely confined to this population while +4 cell markers were absent (e.g. clu) or expressed broadly (e.g. bmi1) (figure 6b).projection of cell-specific markers on a uniform manifold approximation and projection (umap) plot identified fabp2+ car1+ colonocytes abundant muc2+ tff3+ goblet cells (figure 6c) and a tiny fraction of chga+ pyy+ ee cells (figure s6b).notably 556 cells expressed appreciable levels of isc genes as well as colonocyte or goblet cell markers (figure 6d) implying that they represent a bona fide transition along a spectrum of mature and dedifferentiated states.this unsupervised approach identified a continuum of cell states with abundant goblet cells and fewer colonocytes showing distinct trajectories (figure 6e).colonocyte markers declined more rapidly in pseu- dotime than goblet cell markers; conversely isc markers ap- peared more gradually in dedifferentiating goblet cells than in colonocytes (figure 6f).bmi1cre-derived crypt recovery after isc ablation (tian et al. 2011) likely reﬂects bmi1 expression in a large fraction of crypt cells (itzkovitz et al. 2011; mun˜ oz et al. figure 6.(c) projection of il11ra1 mrna levels onto the t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding (tsne) plot from single regenerating cells (figure 6) showing its broad distribution and particular enrichment in the goblet cell fraction.clusters co-expressing isc (e.g. cdca7) and colonocyte (e.g. fabp2) or goblet cell (e.g. muc2) markers were designated as transitional cells (figure 6c) while clusters with high lone expression of isc or lineage markers were designated accordingly.total normalized counts for groups of known marker genes were used to determine cell cycle progres- sion (plk1 rrm2 ccna2 ccnb1 ccnb2 cdk1 cdc25c cdca2 cdc20 ccne2 cdc6 cdc45) or inhibition (cdkn2b cdkn2a cdkn1a cdkn1c) (figure 6b).normalized count data were used to determine relative expression levels of genes in defined cell populations (figure 6c – violin plots generated using the ggplot2 package in r).]
The trajectory of cell states from mature to dedifferentiated cells, with distinct patterns of gene expression changes along pseudotime.

Text 235
10.1126/sciimmunol.aay6017
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 5. g-mdscs emerge through aberrant differentiation trajectory during cancer. (a) neutrophil-specific monocle analysis on subset of ly6g+ neutrophil clusters resulted in branched trajectory with five distinct monocle states (color code for each state is indicated), which are named on the basis of respective gene expression profile. (b) pseudotime plot illustrating expression of selected marker genes over pseudotime with the branch ending in state 1, shown with the dotted line, and the branch ending with state 3, highlighted by the solid line. neutrophil progenitors are characterized by high levels of elane, mpo, and prtn3 (state 4), which bifurcate into mature neutrophils (state 3; camp, ltf, and lcn2) on the one branch and mdscs (state 1; e.g., cd84) on the other branch. (c) early g-mdsc transition was marked by high expression of asprv1, plscr1, and pirb. (d) summary schematic indicates that g-mdscs emerge from neutrophil progenitor cells via an aberrant form of neutrophil differentiation rather than from mature neutrophils that are reprogrammed into immunosuppressive cells.']. Reference sentences:[this resulted in a three-branch trajectory with five distinct cell states (fig 5a).these progenitors then bifurcate into mature neutro- phils (state 3; camp-hi) on the one branch and mdscs (state 1; cd84-hi) on the other branch as illustrated by gene plots over pseudotime (fig 5b) suggesting that g-mdscs emerge from neutro- phil progenitors via an alternative maturation process.monocle detected two additional cell states (2 and 5) around the beginning of the mdsc branch: whereas state 5 was characterized by high ribosomal gene counts indicative of a translationally active cell state state 2 represents the earliest phase of mdsc differentiation and was marked by high expression of asprv1 (46) plscr1 (47) and pirb (paired immunoglobulin-like receptor b) (fig 5c) (48).together these findings indicate that mdscs emerge from neutrophil progenitor cells via an aberrant form of neutrophil differentiation in the spleen rather than from mature neutrophils that are reprogrammed into immunosuppressive cells (fig 5d and table s9).interrogating our observed cell states using pseudotemporal ordering and comparing these to recent work that defined the signatures of various hematopoietic stem and progenitor cell states in single-cell resolution (17) allowed us to reconstruct mdsc form an aberrant trajectory from neutrophil pro- genitor cells that occurs at the cost of normal differentiation into mature neutrophil granulocytes which are less abundant in tumor-bearing mice (fig 5a).further interrogation of the initial transitional cell state that branches off into g-mdscs revealed several genes that strongly increase in expression in this transitional phase (fig 5c) which may suggest that therapeutically interfering with these gene products could block mdsc differentiation before they become functionally active.0.0 2.5 5.0 7.5 10.0 12.5 pseudotime component 1 component 2 neutrophil progenitors elane+ mature neutrophils ltf+ g-mdsc il1b+ g-mdsc transition plscr1+ monocle state 1 2 3 4 5 a d elane cd84 il1b mpo camp prtn3 lcn2 ltf spi1 pseudotime gene expression level b 100 10 1 10 1 100 10 1 100 10 1 100 10 1 10 1 g-mdsc transition plscr1 pirb asprv1 pseudotime gene expression 10 1 10 1 g-mdsc cd84/il1b/spi1+ mature neutrophil camp/lcn2/ltf+ neutrophil progenitor elane/mpo/prtn3+ g-mdsc transition asprv1/plscr1/pirb 100 10 1 1000 10 10 1 10 1 state 1 state 3 c fig 5.]
Patterns related to trajectory: branched differentiation trajectory from neutrophil progenitors to mature neutrophils and g-MDSCs, marked by specific gene expressions over pseudotime.

Text 236
10.1016/j.devcel.2020.01.026
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 4. vasculature differentiation trajectory of integrated dataset computationally defined spring trajectory analysis of cells from the integrated dataset vascular clusters 6, 9, and 18. (a) force-directed plot of cells showing clusters of vsms, vascular endothelial cells, and lymphatic endothelial cells. (b) spring plot as in (a) with regenerative stages of each cell color coded: 11 (orange), 12 (light blue), 14 (purple), and 17 dpa (dark blue) and unamputated (yellow). differential clustering of blastema cells and unamputated cells suggests tissue-specific differentiation of vsms and the vascular endothelium (curved arrows). (c) gene expression overlay on vsms. rgs5 is expressed in all cells, gadd45b is more highly expressed in ua cells, and lgals1 is more highly expressed in blastema cells. high expression is in green and low expression is black. (c’) umap plots of rna velocity and expression data for individual genes gadd45b and lgals1 at 14 and 17 dpa; total rna velocity stream plot for each stage in gray (right). (d) gene expression overlay on vascular endothelial cells. pecam1 is expressed in all cells, rnd1 is more highly expressed in ua cells, and egﬂ7 is more highly expressed in blastema cells. (d’) umap plots of rna velocity and expression data for individual genes rnd1 and egﬂ7 at 14 and 17 dpa; total rna velocity stream plot for each stage in gray (right).']. Reference sentences:[the three vascular-related cell clusters (figure 3b; clusters 6 9 and 18) appear separate in the spring visualization (figure 4a).no major lineage relationship is predicted between vascular and lymphatic endothelial cells (figure 4a).when analyzing the vsm cells and vascular endothe- lial populations by regeneration stage there is qualitative spatial variation between the different time points on the spring plot (figure 4b).closer evaluation of the vsm cells confirms that all of the cells express the tissue-specific marker rgs5 (figure 4c) (li et al. 2004).similarly the cluster of vascular endothelial cells all express the broad marker pecam1 (figure 4d) (albelda et al. 1990; m€uller et al. 2002) though the computationally defined trajectory shows ua cells concentrated on one edge of the spring plot and blastema cells throughout the rest of the cluster consistent with differentiation from vascular endothelial progenitors (expression of egﬂ7) (cam- pagnolo et al. 2005) to terminally differentiated cells (expression of rnd1 (suehiro et al. 2014) (figure 4d).rna velocity analysis of the vascular endothelium supports this predicted trajectory and shows that endothelial cells are specifically increasing the expression of rnd1 and at 17 dpa terminating the expression of egﬂ7 (figure 4d’).the total rna velocity stream plots from 14 and 17 dpa also show that endothelial cell velocity moves to- ward the more differentiated state (figure 4d’).cluster 10 population dynamics can be attributed to cellular proliferation (figure 5f; table s5) however for clusters 0 3 and 11 this suggests a figure 4.conversely our data find discrete clusters of vascular-related cells (vsm vascular endothelium and lymphatic endothelium) taking on distinct cell states throughout digit tip regeneration (figure 4).536 developmental cell 52 525–540 february 24 2020 our analysis provides a refined view of these tissue-specific differentiating cells; for example a canonical cell-type-specific marker such as pecam1 would label all vascular endothelial cells whereby our data detail genes and timing of emergence of different populations potentially useful for experimental access to vascular endothelial progenitors (figure 4 egﬂ7) or terminally differentiated cells (figure 4 rnd1).]
The differentiation trajectory of vascular-related cells during regeneration, with distinct gene expression patterns indicating tissue-specific differentiation.

Text 237
10.1126/science.aax3072
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 3. mrna control strategies during intestinal organoid differentiation. (a) schematics of intestinal organoid crypts. (b) umap showing the expression levels of lgr5-gfp (green) in 3831 cells from intestinal organoids. (c) umap showing clusters of cells with similar gene expression (som analysis, cluster number indicated) and their respective cell identity. (d) umap showing the expression levels (blue) of four genes that are markers for stem cells, paneth cells, enterocytes, and tuft cells, respectively. (e) umap showing the monocle2 differentiation branches 1 and 2, as indicated by arrows. colors indicate the monocle trajectory values. (f) heat maps of the observed expression levels along the two differentiation branches, the secretory lineage into paneth cells (branch 1) and the enterocyte lineage (branch 2) (n = 301 genes). red dots mark the position of housekeeping genes. (g) as in (f) but showing the estimated synthesis (left panels) and degradation rates (right panels). genes are clustered and the cosine similarity is indicated independently for the two branches. strategies with strong changes in the synthesis and the degradation rates are highlighted in (i) and (j). (h) density plot of the peak timing distance against the dynamic range of the']. Reference sentences:[the umap (uniform manifold approximation and projection for dimension reduction) rep- resentation of the 3831 cells that passed quality controls places stem cells in the center and shows two branches representing the differen- tiation trajectories of enterocytes and secretory cells (fig 3 b to d).we clustered single-cell expression levels using soms and identified stem cells (clusters 8 and 11) fully differentiated cells (clusters 1 3 5 9 and 10) and potentially intermediate stages (clusters 10 4 6 and 2; fig 3c).we used monocle2 (22) to sort cells along the differentiation trajectories of secretory cells (branch 1) and enterocytes (branch 2; fig 3e and fig s14 a to c).the housekeeping genes clus- tered separately from differentially regulated genes between branches 1 and 2 (fig 3 f and g and fig s15a).when we analyzed the gene expression dy- namics as before assuming a constant synthe- sis rate we observed that the dynamic range decreased and the expression timing and dy- namics changed (fig 3h).by contrast a con- stant degradation rate had little effect on the timing of the expression peak but increased the variance of the dynamic range; although the dynamic range of genes with destabiliz- ing strategies increased (groups a and e) it decreased for genes with cooperating strat- egies (groups b and d; fig 3 i and j).in agree- ment with this we found that the absolute increase in the synthesis rate of genes in group a was higher than those in group b (fig 3 k and l) whereas the expression levels in both groups changed along the differentiation tra- jectory with similar dynamics and magnitude (fig 3 m and n).this effect is explained by the stabilization of transcripts in group b toward the end of differentiation branch 2 (fig 3l and fig s15c).]
Summary: Differentiation trajectories of cells into enterocytes and secretory cells, with changes in gene expression dynamics and synthesis/degradation rates along the trajectories.

Text 238
10.1016/j.celrep.2020.02.067
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 4. inferring a muscle stem/progenitor cell hierarchy using monocle pseudotime model (a) all cells within the muscle stem/progenitor and mature skeletal muscle myonuclei clusters (3,276 total cells) from days 0, 5, and 7 post-injury (top left) were selected and re-analyzed by snn/umap (bottom left) and monocle reverse graph embedding (right). graph embedding results are presented with cells color-coded by day and labeled by snn cluster identities. (b–d) a refined analysis of muscle stem and progenitor subpopulations, after removal of mature myocytes, by monocle. these non-mature muscle cells were subjected to reverse graph embedding and trajectory inference using monocle’s differential expression analysis to identify cell groups (‘‘branches’’). (b) the top-75 differentially expressed genes in the three branches (qu, quiescent muscs; cy, cycling progenitors; co, committed progenitors), organized by branch and then ordered within each branch by pseudotime value (see figures s5d and s5e). (c) monocle feature plots showing three branch groups (qu, cy, co) connected by a learned manifold (black lines). same colors are used to associate individual cells with branch groups in (c, top left) and (d). the abundance of pax7, myog, and cdk1 transcripts are plotted for individual cells using a z score normalized color-scale. (d) pseudotime ordered single-cell expression trajectories for genes enriched in the quiescence (qu) cluster (pax7, btg2), in the cycling (cy) cluster (cdk1, cdc20), and in the commitment (co) cluster (myog, cdkn1c). overlaid lines correspond to inferred cell trajectories associated with ending in the cycling (hatched) and commitment (solid) clusters. see also figure s5.']. Reference sentences:[we applied monocle reverse graph embedding (qiu et al. 2017) to the cumulative myogenic cell population within the atlas to infer a hierarchical trajectory (figure 4a).both the beginning and ending branches within the trajectory are composed of cells from days 0 and 7 post-injury indicating they consist of pax7hi quies- cent muscs and acta1hi terminally differentiated myocytes respectively which are both absent at intermediate time-points (figure 4a).a b c d figure 4.trajectory analysis allowed us to parse the myogenic differentiation lineage post-injury in four distinct groups: quiescent muscs cycling progenitors committed progenitors and mature skeletal muscle with distinct gene-expression sig- natures (figure 4).]
Summary: Trajectory analysis reveals distinct cell groups in muscle differentiation lineage, with gene expression patterns indicating quiescent, cycling, and committed cells.

Text 239
10.1016/j.celrep.2020.02.067
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 5. ligand-receptor model reveals diversification of communication signals linked to heterogeneously expressed syndecan family receptors during muscle regeneration (a) chord plot summarizing the significant pairwise interactions between receptor genes that are differentially expressed in the musc and progenitor cell population and ligand genes expressed by other cell types within the transcriptomic atlas. (left) uninjured (day 0) samples. (right) injured (days 5 and 7 postinjury) samples. differentially expressed receptor genes outside of the syndecan family are in gray. for a given ligand-receptor pair, we only represent interactions whose score (figures s6a and s6b) is greater than the 50th percentile across all cell types. (b) sdc1/2/3/4 and ccnb1 (cyclin-b1) transcript averages across all non-mature myogenic cells within the transcriptomic atlas, split by days post-injury. p values listed if differentially expressed across time-points when modeled using a negative binomial distribution. (c) ccnb1 and sdc1/2/3/4 gene-expression levels within the myogenic cells organized into the monocle trajectory (see figure 4c). (d) (left) cytof atlas, consisting of 19,028 cells collected from regenerating (day 5 post-injury) muscles and stained with a panel of 35 antibodies (see table s1) including syndecan-1/2/3/4 and cyclin-b1. umap and unsupervised snn clustering identified 11 populations including a population of pax7+ muscs (orange) and myog+ myogenic progenitors (blue). these two myogenic clusters were grouped for further analysis. (right) cyclin-b1 versus pax7 scatterplots. (top) coded using cytof snn cluster identifiers. (bottom) coded by subpopulation gates: cyclin-b1– pax7+ quiescent cells (qu; pink), cyclin-b1+ cycling progenitors (cy; blue), and cyclin-b1– pax7– committed myocytes (co; green). (e) expression histograms for syndecan-1/2/3/4 and other myogenic markers for the three subpopulations identified in (d). see also figure s6.']. Reference sentences:[we performed differ- ential gene expression testing on the non-mature myogenic cell populations within the transcriptomic atlas between the days 0 5 and 7 samples and found that sdc1 and sdc2 were elevated at day 5 post-injury (along with the cycling musc gene ccnb1) and sdc4 was elevated in the uninjured muscle (figure 5b).further sdc1 and sdc2 have enhanced expression in the ccnb1hi cy branch of the monocle trajectory (figure 5c).unsupervised snn clustering revealed 11 subpopulations of cells including endothelial cells faps macro- phages lymphocytes mesenchymal progenitors an unresolved group of cd9+ cells and two myogenic populations (figure 5d).these myogenic populations were merged and subpopulations were gated based on their cycling and pax7 expression status into quiescent cells (cyclin-b1– pax7+) cycling progenitors (cyclin- b1+) and committed myocytes (cyclin-b1– pax7–) (figure 5e).ligand-receptor interaction model identifies paracrine communication factors inﬂuencing musc proliferation in vitro with differential dependence on syndecans to examine the role of the ligand-receptor interaction pairs on musc function we performed in vitro recombinant protein treat- ment tests on cultured muscs and focused on sdc interactions given their prevalence in the transcriptomic dataset (figure 5a).we observed no changes of musc survival and proliferation due a b c d e figure 5.both our scrna-seq and cytof data suggest that these four sdcs are expressed heterogeneously and in a stage-specific manner at both the transcript and protein level within quiescent cycling and committed myogenic stem/ progenitor cells (figure 5).]
Patterns related to cell trajectory are shown, including changes in gene expression levels across different cell states and time points.

Text 240
10.15252/embj.2020104486
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 4. identification of the cluster-specific molecular pathways and of the filiation between the ni clusters. a heatmap representing the z-score for the top 5 regulons of each cluster determined with scenic. the dendrogram on the left side of the panel indicates the correlation between the regulons across the dataset. the z-score is indicated with a gradient from magenta (z-score < 0, the regulon is repressed) to yellow (zscore > 0, the regulon is active). b dendrogram representing the distance among the clusters. the tree was built on the correlation (spearman) calculated on the regulon matrix from the ni dataset. c lineage prediction using rna velocity. the arrows and lines on the umap predict the “direction” taken by the cells of each cluster, based on the comparison between the levels of mrna and pre-mrna. note that the clusters cc and pl-impl2 (dashed lines) have been moved from their original position to fit in the graph. d single-cell trajectory reconstructed with monocle 2 on the ni dataset. the first panel shows the overlap of all clusters, and subsequent panels show restricted number of clusters for which the rna velocity analysis suggested a filiation.']. Reference sentences:[8 of 25 the embo journal e104486 | 2020 ª 2020 the authors the embo journal pierre b cattenoz et al fig 4a).the scenic analysis allowed us to associate specific regulons to each cluster (fig 4a).the pl-prolif cluster and the closely related cluster pl-inos (fig 4b) are enriched for the regulons ecr and e2f1 that are involved in the regulation of hemocyte proliferation (sinenko et al 2010).following this the cluster identities were appended to the rna velocity map (fig 4c).the map suggests that pl-prolif/pl-inos is at the origin of most clusters that pl-0 pl-1 pl-2 and pl-3 are derived from pl-inos and that pl-vir1 pl-rel and pl-robo2 are issued from pl-3 pl-0 and pl-2 (fig 4c).at last no clear direc- tionality could be drawn for pl-amp pl-pcd cc and pl-impl2 which suggests that their direct progenitors are not detected in our dataset (fig 4c).the monocle analysis identi- fied trajectories in line with the branches observed with rna velocity (fig 4d).ª 2020 the authors the embo journal e104486 | 2020 9 of 25 pierre b cattenoz et al the embo journal pl.robo2 a b correlation (spearman) between the ni clusters dendrogram based on the regulon z-scores c lineage prediction (rna velocity) d lineage prediction (monocle 2) component 1 component 2 pl.inos pl.prolif pl.1 pl.2 pl.robo2 pl.rel pl.3 component 1 component 2 pl.inos pl.prolif pl.3 pl.0 component 1 component 2 pl.inos pl.prolif pl.robo2 pl.pcd pl.amp pl.vir1 component 1 component 2 pl.inos pl.prolif cc pl.impl2 component 1 component 2 pl.lsp cc pl.impl2 pl.lsp pl.1 pl.2 pl.robo2 pl.inos pl.prolif pl.3 pl.0 pl.rel pl.pcd pl.amp pl.vir1 component 1 component 2 he2f1 ecr crp pnt lzjim runxb ctcf cnx99a tbp kni zif cg9609 kn ham bink7.1 nf−yb emc atf3 usf ets21c rel crebb jra xbp1 creba luna kay srp cipnr l(3)neo38 foxo pl.inos pl.prolif pl.1 pl.3 cc pl.pcd pl.amp pl.vir1 pl.rel pl.0 pl.lsp pl.robo2 pl.impl2 −2 −1 0 1 2 z-score top regulons (scenic) pl.2 pl.2 pl.0 pl.lsp pl.amp pl.vir1 pl.rel pl.pcd pl.impl2 cc pl.1 pl.3 pl.inos pl.prolif 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 distance (1-correlation[spearman]) umap 1 umap 2 c g p ( y) pl−2 pl−1 pl−robo2 pl−0 pl−3 pl−inos pl−rel pl−lsp pl−vir1 pl−pcd pl−impl2 pl−prolif cc pl-amp figure 4.a lineage prediction for the clusters from the wi sample using rna velocity as in fig 4c.]
Summary: Trajectory patterns of cluster relationships and lineage predictions based on regulon analysis, RNA velocity, and Monocle 2 in single-cell data.

Text 241
10.15252/embj.2020104486
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 7. identification of the filiation between the wi clusters. a lineage prediction for the clusters from the wi sample using rna velocity, as in fig 4c. b single-cell trajectory reconstructed with monocle 2 on the wi dataset. the panels show restricted number of clusters for which the rna velocity analysis suggested a filiation.']. Reference sentences:[12 of 25 the embo journal e104486 | 2020 ª 2020 the authors the embo journal pierre b cattenoz et al branches from pl-prolif/pl-inos to pl-robo2 pl-rel and pl-vir1 as those identified in the ni larvae are observed (fig 7a and b).a umap_1 umap_2 pl−2 pl−1 pl−robo2 pl−0 pl−3 pl−inos pl−rel pl−lsp pl−vir1 pl−pcd pl−impl2 lm−2 pl−prolif cc lm−1 pl−amp b cc pl.impl2 pl.lsp pl.1 pl.2 pl.robo2 pl.inos pl.prolif pl.3 pl.0 pl.rel pl.pcd pl.amp pl.vir1 lm.1 lm.2 component 1 component 2 pl.rel pl.amp component 1 component 2 pl.inos pl.prolif lm.1 lm.2 pl.vir1 component 1 component 2 pl.inos pl.prolif cc pl.impl2 pl.1 pl.robo2 pl.0 component 1 component 2 pl.2 pl.3 component 1 component 2 pl.robo2 pl.lsp pl.pcd component 1 component 2 figure 7.]
Summary: Single-cell trajectory analysis reveals lineage relationships between clusters in the dataset.

Text 242
10.1016/j.cell.2020.02.048
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 1. scrna-seq analysis reveals a novel pancreatic cell population with emt properties (a) t-sne plot of 7,160 pancreatic single-cell (sc) rna-seq profiles (points), colored by cluster assignment and annotated post hoc. the new population (new pop.) is circled in turquoise. number of cells is shown in brackets under the indicated cell type. cells are pooled from n = 3 biological replicates. mesen., mesenchymal; endo., endothelial. (b and c) individual gene t-sne plots showing the expression levels and distribution of representative marker genes of known pancreatic cell types (b) and the new population (c). the colors ranging from blue to red indicate low to high relative gene expression levels. the vlin plot shows the expression level (log2(tpm+1)) of the indicated gene in each cell type. (d) heatmap of cell-type-enriched genes. each column represents a single cell and each row represents one signature gene. the colors ranging from purple to yellow indicate low to high relative gene expression levels. (e) selected go terms of upregulated genes in the new population. 1,536 genes are selected with p value <5eà3. (f) individual gene t-sne plots showing the expression levels and distribution of epithelial and mesenchymal representative markers. the colors ranging from blue to red indicate low to high relative gene expression levels. the vlin plot shows the expression level (log2(tpm+1)) of the indicated gene in each cell type. the new population (circled in turquoise) express both epithelial and mesenchymal markers. (g) developmental trajectory of adult new population, a, b, d, and pp cells (4,986 cells used) produced by monocle 2. the colors in the left panel denote cell types. cell counts for the indicated cell types are labeled in brackets. pseudotime (arbitrary units) is depicted from dark to light blue (right panel). see also figures s1 and s2.']. Reference sentences:[gene ontology (go) analysis identified enrichment of cell migration epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (emt) and wnt pathway features (figure 1e).the co-expression of epithelial markers (epcam krt8 and cldn10) and mesenchymal markers (mmp2 col1a1 and vim) supported the emt characteristics of the new population (figure 1f).the analysis predicted two developmental trajectories (i.e. one toward b cell and another toward a cell) (figure 1g).consistent with the results of scrna-seq (figure 1b) and procrmgfp-2a-lacz reporter (figure 2e) analyses these labeled cells were ins= gcg= sst= and ppy= (figures 3b and s3h).single-cell rna-seq analysis of mouse pancreatic cells related to figure 1 (a) quality metrics for the pancreatic scrna-seq data.the new population in adult aligns with a subpopulation of embryonic endocrine precursors related to figure 1 (a) two published scrna-seq datasets containing e14.5 ngn3-expressing endocrine precursors are integrated with our adult scrna-seq dataset and projected onto t-sne plots colored by cluster assignment and annotated post hoc.]
Summary: Identification of a novel cell population with epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition properties and two developmental trajectories in single-cell transcriptomics data.

Text 243
10.1242/dev.183855
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure s13: lineage regression frequency with age (a) the proportion of “regressing” cells across pseudotime in aged and young muscs, revealing little age dependence. proportions were computed by coarse-graining pseudotime into equally sized bins. (b) proportion of “regressing” cells across pseudotime in young lrcs and nonlrcs. nonlrcs regress more frequently late in the activation process (χ2 test, p < 0.0001. (c) the difference in lineage regression frequency between lrcs and nonlrcs is also present in muscs from aged animals (χ2 test, p < 0.0001). (d) we computed the difference in velocity for each gene between cells moving “forward” and “backward” in the activation trajectory. gene ontology enrichments suggest forward moving cells have higher velocity for protein translation and biogenesis programs, while backward moving cells have higher velocity for mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation programs.']. Reference sentences:[]
Summary: The comparison of lineage regression frequency and gene velocity in different cell trajectories.

Text 244
10.1242/dev.183855
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 6: aged muscs transition aberrantly through transcriptional space. (a) musc transcriptional space overlaid with arrows representing the direction and magnitude of rna velocity at each state location (20,827 cells). colors indicate transcriptional clusters. (b) representative phase point simulations in aged and young rna velocity fields, overlaid on the activated musc cells in a pca embedding. (c) state transition rates as measured by rna velocity magnitude across pseudotime using a rolling mean. (d) predicted pseudotime progression for phase point simulations in either aged (red) or young (blue) velocity fields. young phase points progress more rapidly than aged cells. curves cross when young and aged phase points have both reached a steady-state at the end of our observed pseudotime trajectory. n= 1000 phase points simulated for each age. (e) change in pseudotime for phase point simulations at each timestep. (f) heatmap representing the mean density of phase points at each point in pc space across the entire simulation. young and aged phase simulations show qualitatively similar trajectories through state space. (g) terminal locations of young and aged phase point simulations in pc space, overlaid on cell locations. both young and aged simulations show similar final resting positions.']. Reference sentences:[performing rna velocity estimation shows that each state of musc transcription gives rise to a neighboring state in the sequence inferred by pseudotiming (fig 6a).quantifying the magnitude of rna velocity across pseudotime in muscs reveals that rna velocity follows a concave curve (fig 6c).comparing these inferred coordinates young phase points progress more rapidly through the activation process than aged phase points (fig 6d).after many time steps both young and aged phase points reach similar inferred pseudotime locations as they near the edge of our observed pseudotime trajectory (fig 6d).computing numerical derivatives for pseudotime coordinates 𝛥pseudotime young phase points appear to progress more rapidly from the earliest time steps (fig 6e).visualizing the density of phase points in transcriptional space as the number of phase points to pass through a region there are qualitatively few differences in the shape of trajectories between young and aged cells (fig 6f movie s5).focusing on the locations where phase points come to rest there are likewise modest differences in the specific shapes of attractor states but overall similar attractor positions between young and aged phase point simulations (fig 6g).]
Summary: Trajectory analysis of musc cells shows differences in progression speed but similar final resting positions between young and aged cells.

Text 245
10.7150/thno.40663
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 5. genome-wide, single-cell transcriptomic profiling reveals a skewed cell fate commitment of cd8+ t-cells in leprdb/db mice after injury. (a) biaxial scatter plots by t-sne analysis showing single-cell transcriptomic clustering of ~1,000 cd45+cd3+cd8+ cells purified from the ischemic muscles of leprdb/+ and leprdb/db mice, respectively, at day 7 after injury by flow cytometry; and three distinct subsets are identified. (b) distribution of cell number of cd8+ t-cells in each cell subset as determined by t-sne. (c, d) monocle ordering of individual cells showing two branched developmental and response trajectories of cd8+ t-cells of leprdb/+ and leprdb/db mice after ischemic injury in a pseudotime-dependent manner. (e) heatmap showing branch-dependent genes by beam analysis during fate 1 or 2 commitment of cd8+ t-cells. a total of 699 genes with significant q-value cutoffs are presented and distinct clusters are identified along the tree. (f) relative expression levels of specific canonical markers by cells of all three distinct subsets on t-sne plots.']. Reference sentences:[our t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding (t-sne) analysis revealed three distinct subsets (figure 5a) that were cd3+cd4-cd8+ (figure s3).moreover the results showed that s1 and s3 were more prominent in leprdb/+ while s2 was the main subset in leprdb/db (figure 5b table 1).we found two branched biological processes (figure 5c); and s1 cells should be of an earlier cell fate that preceded s2 and then s3 cells (figure 5d).heatmap showed 699 genes using q-value cutoffs of 0.01 (figure 5e table s1).furthermore we found that genes of cluster ii were overexpressed in s2 cells; genes of cluster iii were overexpressed in s3 cells; and genes of cluster iv were overexpressed in s1 cells (figure 5e).based on expression of canonical markers we could further annotate specific cd8+ t-cell subsets into angiogenic (loxl2+ [19]) central memory (ccr7+ sell+) s1 cells; effector (klrg1+ cd44+ ifngr1hi stat4hi zeb2+ [20] id2hi [21]) and effector memory (cd28hi [22] id2hi [23]) s2 cells; as well as tissue resident memory (id3+ [23] cd69hi [24]) s3 cells (figure 5f).]
Developmental trajectories of CD8+ T-cells in response to injury, with distinct subsets and gene expression patterns along pseudotime.

Text 246
10.1038/s41591-020-0799-2
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 1 | longitudinal profiling of peripheral immune cells in hyperacute and acute hiv infection by scrna-seq. a, depiction of the typical trajectory of hiv viral load in the plasma during hyperacute and acute hiv infection adapted from fiebig et al.8 and the timepoints sampled in this study. since participants were tested twice weekly, there was an uncertainty of up to 3d in where on the viral load curve the first detectable viremia occurred (error bar is representative). the exact days sampled are available in supplementary table 1. b, viral load and cd4+ t cell count for four participants assayed in this study. dotted lines indicate a missing data point for the metric. c, t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding (tsne) analysis of pbmcs from all participants and timepoints sampled (n=59,162). cells are annotated based on differential expression analysis on orthogonally discovered clusters. d, tsne in c annotated by timepoint (top) and participant (bottom). e, scatter-plot depicting the correlation between cell frequencies of cd4+ and cd8+ t cells measured by seq-well (n=2 array replicates) and facs (n=1 flow replicate). r2 values reflect variance described by an f-test for linear regression.']. Reference sentences:[we ana- lyzed multiple timepoints from pre-infection through 1 year follow- ing viral detection (fig 1a supplementary table 1 and methods) over which all four demonstrated a rapid rise in plasma viremia and a drop in cd4+ t cell counts8 (fig 1b and extended data fig 1a).altogether we captured 59162 cells after performing quality con- trols with an average of 1976 cells per participant per timepoint (extended data fig 1b and supplementary table 2).these analyses yielded few participant-specific features suggesting that disease biology rather than technical artifact is the main driver of variation (fig 1d and extended data fig 1cd).we annotated clusters by compar- ing differentially expressed genes defining each to known lineage markers and previously published datasets (extended data fig 1ef and supplementary table 3).flow cytometry measurements of cd45+cd3+cd4+ and cd45+cd3+cd8+ frequencies over the course of infection corre- lated with those measured by seq-well (extended data fig 2ab and fig 1e).meanwhile non- classical monocytes displayed disparate temporal dynamics across participants (extended data fig 1d and 9d).further unsupervised and directed approaches did not demonstrate significant differences in ctl responses across par- ticipants (extended data fig 10ab and supplementary table 10).differential expression analysis high- lighted genes associated with cell cycle and memory for proliferating and nonproliferating ctls respectively (extended data fig 10cd and supplementary table 10).t cell receptor (tcr) pulldown and enrichment (tcr-β cdr3) revealed few expanded clones (extended data fig 10ef supplementary table 10 and methods); this however may be affected by sample size (cdr3s were detected in 982 prolif- erating t cells).we next used unsupervised analyses to examine differences in proliferating t cell responses over time among participants (fig 4c and extended data fig 10g).using sig- natures from a single-cell study of cytotoxic cells we determined that the fcgr3a+ cells were nk cells (extended data fig 10h and methods).to determine whether trdc+fcgr3a+ cells were γδt or nk cells we scored them as well as nonproliferating ctls and nk cells against gene signatures described in that study (extended data fig 10g).percentage calculated from cluster assignment (see extended data fig 1d).]
Summary: Trajectory patterns of viral load and cell counts in single cells during acute HIV infection were analyzed, revealing minimal participant-specific features.

Text 247
10.1038/s41586-020-2157-4
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 3 | application of schcl analysis for stem cell biology. a, diagram showing the pipeline for schcl analysis. b, c, schcl results for pancreatic islet cells (b; n = 4,156 cells) derived from seven-stage differentiation of h9 cells (day 24) and haematopoietic cells (c; n = 1,115 cells) derived from h9/op9 cell co-cultures (day 9). each row represents one cell type in our reference. each column represents data from a single cell. pearson correlation coefficient was used to evaluate cell-type gene expression similarity. red indicates a high correlation; grey indicates a low correlation. some cell-type data come from published works, as denoted by first author name: segerstolpe27, muraro28, baron29, han57. d, branching gene expression trajectory analysis of day 20']. Reference sentences:[input digital gene expression (dge) data were com- pared to each transcriptome reference to provide a match score based on gene expression correlation (fig 3a).many cells present in the differentiated culture on day 24 exhibited a strong correlation with pancreatic cell types (fig 3b).only cells from c7 and c11 which contained endothelial cells and erythroid cells had high schcl scores for mature human cell types (fig 3c).trajectory and rna velocity analysis suggested that the undefined cell clusters were at the root of the differentiation hierarchy with high rna turnover rate whereas the defined cell types are at the endpoint of the trajectory and have relatively stable transcriptomes (fig 3d).we also found similar patterns for the human haematopoietic differentiation system using single-cell data from cd34+ cord blood and cd34+ mobilized peripheral blood (mpb; fig 3e f).article extended data fig 3 | t-sne maps for examples of analysed fetal tissues in the hcl.]
Summary: Trajectory analysis reveals differentiation hierarchy and stable transcriptomes in single cells.

Text 248
10.34067/kid.0000422019
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 6. | er stress promotes dedifferentiation of gecs in g1 kidney organoids. (a) heatmap depicts relative average expression of podocyte markers for g0 and g1 gecs and early gecs treated with either ifn-g alone or both ifn-g and tunicamycin. (b) violin plots of podxl expression in the gec clusters of g0 and g1 organoids subjected to either ifn-g alone or both ifn-g and tunicamycin. (c) partition-based graph abstraction (paga) (42) visualizes trajectory inference of all organoid single cells. the more mature gecs are connected to nonmesenchyme cell clusters in the topology of the control organoids. for g0 organoids subjected to both ifn-g and tunicamycin, the more mature glomerular cells are still more distant from the mesenchyme. paga visualization of g1 organoids subjected to both ifn-g and tunicamycin reveals less distinct separation of gecs from early gecs and mesenchyme. (d) trajectory inference umap of all sequenced organoids was created using monocle3. the trajectory of the relationship among mesenchyme, early gecs, and more mature gecs is circled and taken forward to (e), where g1 organoids treated with both ifn-g and tunicamycin (red) have a relatively smaller proportion of gecs to early gecs compared with g0 organoids subjected to the same stressors (orange). (f) the relative number of gecs (black) to early gecs (white) is represented by the bar charts of g0 and g1 control organoids (left), g0 organoids treated with ifn-g and tunicamycin (middle), and g1 organoids treated with ifn-g and tunicamycin (right).']. Reference sentences:[208 kidney360 epithelial cells became closer to the other cell types in spatial relationship whereas g0 glomerular epithelial cells still remained more distinct from the other cell clusters (figure 6c).210 kidney360 g0 g1 podxl (+) (+) — — ifn-γγ tunicamycin (+) — b a g0 g1 g0 g1 g0 g1 g0 g1 gec gec early gec early gec 2 1.5 1 0.5 0 tunicamycin — — — — (+) (+) (+) (+) ifn-γ (+) (+) (+) (+) (+) (+) (+) (+) podxl nphs1 postn c g1 whole organoids g0 and g1 whole organoids ifn-γ (+) — tunicamycin g0 whole organoids (+) (+) (+) — proximal and distal tubule glomerular epithelial cells endothelial cells early glomerular epithelial cells neurons mesenchyme cycling cells 6 2 4 13 7 8 10 2 6 10 4 13 7 8 2 6 10 4 13 7 8 d mesenchyme early gecs gecs proximal and distal tubule endothelial cells neurons cycling cells ls endothelial cel neurons ycling cells cy proximal and distal tubule e gecs early gecs f mesenchyme early gecs gecs ifn-γ (+) (+) — g0 and g1 g0 g1 tunicamycin (+) — (+) 40% 34% 13% g0 and g1 control g0 ifn-γ + tunicamycin g1 ifn-γ + tunicamycin figure 6.]
Patterns related to the trajectory of cell differentiation in response to ER stress in kidney organoids, with a focus on the transition from early to more mature cell states.

Text 249
10.1016/j.cmet.2020.03.009
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 2. gene expression signatures in cnv and tec subtypes (a) dot plot heatmap of the inferred activity of the indicated transcription factors. scale: white/gray is low expression; black is high gene expression; dot size corresponds to the fraction of cells in each cluster that have higher than average activity of the indicated transcription factor. (b) pseudotime trajectory of the indicated cnv-ec phenotypes (left) and loess regression-smoothened gene expression of the indicated genes and metabolic gene sets in pseudotime (right). (c) vascular gene sets upregulated in tecs (versus lung necs) and in cnv-ecs (versus choroid cecs). gene sets congruently upregulated in tecs and cnv-ecs are summarized on the right. (d) genes upregulated in tecs versus necs and choroid cecs versus cnv-ecs. a selection of genes upregulated in lung tecs versus necs (left) and in cnvecs versus choroid cecs (right) are listed. genes congruently upregulated in tecs and cnv-ecs are listed on the right. genes encoding ribosomal proteins, atp synthase subunits, and elongation factors are not listed individually; instead, their total number is displayed.']. Reference sentences:[interestingly transcription factor activity analysis using single- cell regulatory network inference and clustering (scenic) (aibar et al. 2017) indicated differential transcription factor activity in ec subtypes (figure 2a).scenic analysis of cnv-ecs also identified transcription factors not previously impli- cated in ec specification such as in tip (tgif1) immature (smad1 and sox4) and proliferating (trp53) cnv-ecs (figure 2a).trajectory inference analysis predicted that the hierarchy of angiogenic phenotypes resulted from differentiation of activated pcv cecs to transitioning cnv- ecs then to immature cnv-ecs which thereafter differenti- ated to tip cells and finally to more mature neophalanx cnv- ecs (figure 2b).interestingly when focusing on metabolic genes and path- ways we noted that membrane transport atp synthase and glycolysis gene signatures were dynamically regulated during differentiation from quiescent vein to angiogenic ecs (figure 2b).maximal differences in metabolic gene expression of central car- bon metabolism were observed in the most angiogenic ec phe- notypes (immature and tip ecs) possibly suggesting that these ecs had higher metabolic demands to execute their biological functions (figure 2b).gene sets associated with prolifera- tion hypoxia signaling and extracellular matrix formation were commonly upregulated (figure 2c).cell metabolism 31 862–877 april 7 2020 865 a b c d e f figure 2.interestingly aplnr an angiogenic and vasculoprotective gene that regulates ec metabolism (apostolidis et al. 2018; hwangbo et al. 2017) was identified as a congruent marker of cnv-ecs and tecs (figure 2d).]
Summary: Trajectory analysis reveals differentiation patterns in EC subtypes, with dynamic regulation of metabolic genes during differentiation and common upregulation of proliferation-related gene sets.

Text 250
10.1038/s41587-020-0480-9
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 3 | inferring single-cell transcriptional dynamics with sci-fate. a, schematic of approach for linking cells based on estimated past transcriptional states to reconstruct single-cell transition trajectories. b, three-dimensional plot of all cells (cell number, n=6,680). the x and y coordinates correspond to the joint information umap space shown in the far-right panel of fig 1e. the z coordinate as well as colors correspond to dex treatment time. linked parent and child cells are connected with gray lines. c, schematic comparing conventional scrna-seq and sci-fate for cell trajectory analysis. d, similar to b, except the x and y coordinates correspond to the umap space based on the single-cell transition trajectories across the six time points (cell number, n=6,680). e,f, barplots showing the contributions of the three gr response states (e) and the nine different cell-cycle states (f) to each of three celltrajectory clusters.']. Reference sentences:[altogether we identified 986 links between 29 tfs and 532 genes (see supplementary fig 3ab and supplementary table 2).41) and junb42 (see supplementary fig 3cd).this group also included sev- eral tfs not previously implicated in the gr response including yod1 and gtf2ird1 both of which exhibited greater expression and activity in dex-treated cells (see supplementary fig 3ef).notably the expression levels of tfs such as e2f1 were more highly cor- related with the levels of newly synthesized than overall target gene mrnas (see supplementary fig 3g).the other modules include one cor- responding to gr-activated g1/g2/m-phase cells (klf6 tead1 and yod1; see supplementary fig 3h) and another corresponding to probably differentiating gr-activated g1-phase cells (gata3 and ar; see supplementary fig 3h)4447.with these parameters in hand we next estimated the past transcriptional state of each cell in our dataset (see methods and supplementary fig 6ab) and sought to use these estimated states to link individual cells to each other across time points (fig 3a).applying this strategy to each of the five intervals com- prising our experiment we constructed a set of linkages spanning the entire dataset and time course (fig 3b).a key contrast with conventional pseudotime is that with sci- fate each cell is now characterized not only by its present state but also by specific linkages to a series of distinct cells matching its predicted past and/or future states (fig 3c).to evaluate whether these mini-trajectories contain structure we applied umap and unsupervised clustering which resulted in three distinct trajectory clusters (fig 3d).as expected all three trajectories exhibited a rapid transition from no gr activa- tion to low/high gr activation (fig 3e).however each trajectory appears to correspond to a different starting point with respect to the cell cycle (fig 3f).as expected the greater the distance between any pair of states the lower the proportional representation of that transition in the time (h) b a 0 2 4 6 8 10 umap-2 (joint information time umap-1 (joint information) c time umap-1 (cell-state dynamics) cell trajectory 1 cell trajectory 2 cell trajectory 3 d leftover transcriptome before labeling newly synthesized transcriptome c recover two states per cell construct single- cell trajectory single-cell trajectory cell-state transition patterns static cell state sci-fate conventional scrna-seq pseudo-trajectory f 0 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 cell-cycle state 1 2 3 cell trajectory cell proportion early g1 late g2/m 0 2 4 6 8 10 0 2 4 6 8 10 0 2 4 6 8 10 time (h) e 0 2 4 6 8 10 0 2 4 6 8 10 0 2 4 6 8 10 0 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 time (h) no gr activation low gr activation high gr activation gr response state 1 2 3 cell trajectory cell proportion umap-2 (cell-state dynamics) fig 3 | inferring single-cell transcriptional dynamics with sci-fate.]
Summary: Identification of single-cell transition trajectories based on estimated past transcriptional states, linking cells across time points to reveal distinct trajectory clusters.

Text 251
10.1038/s41587-020-0480-9
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 4 | constructing a state transition network for gr response and cell cycle. a, cell-state transition network. the nodes are 27 cell states characterized by combinations of cell-cycle and gr activation states. the links represent frequent cell-state transition trajectories (transition proportion >10%) between cell states. this threshold for defining a link corresponds to approximately 2s.d. from the mean transition proportion calculated after permutating celltransition links (n=729). b, the x and y coordinates correspond to the joint information umap space shown in the far-right panel of fig 1e, colored by dex treatment time (top) or inferred cell-cycle state (bottom). gray lines represent inferred cell-state transition links between parent and child cells (middle: cell-state transition links starting from cells at the s phase and no gr activation stage (link number, n=433); right: cell-state transition links starting from cells at the g2/m phase and no gr activation stage (link number, n=365)). black arrows show main cell-state transition directions. c, scatter plot showing the relationship between transition distance (pearson’s distance) and transition proportion (n=729), together with the red loess (locally estimated scatter-plot smoothing) smoothed line by ggplot265. d, three-dimensional plot showing the cell-state stability landscape. the x axis represents gr response states (from no to low to high activation state). the y axis represents the cell-cycle states ordered from g1 to g2/m. the z axis represents cell-state instability, defined as the proportion of cells inferred to be moving out of a given state between time points.']. Reference sentences:[each of 27 possible state combinations was represented by some cells with the smallest group corresponding to 1.1% of the overall data- set (n = 74 cells intersection of ‘early g2/m’ cell-cycle state and ‘no gr activation’ state; see supplementary fig 4ab).second the relative proportions of each of the 27 possible state combinations are readily predicted by proportions of cell-cycle and gr response states that is with no interaction term (see supplementary fig 4b).consistent with dex treatment transitions are highly biased from the g1 to s s to g2/m and g2/m to g1 phase of the cell cycle (fig 4a).the 27 states shown in fig 4a each correspond to subsets of cells the transcriptomes of which are similar making use of the joint information provided by distinguishing between old (>2 h) and new (<2 h) transcripts.as examples s-phase cells without gr activation (0-h treatment) mostly tran- sit into s-phase cells with gr activation (2-h treatment) whereas g2/m-phase cells with no gr activation (0-h treatment) mostly transit to g2/m- or g1-phase cells with gr activation (2-h treat- ment) (fig 4b).as a second approach we computed ‘instability’ as the proportion of cells inferred to be moving out of a given state between time points (fig 4d).these representations of the data are consistent with the transition network wherein the states corresponding to high gr activation and early g1 are a frequent ‘destination’ of all nearby states (purple triangles in fig 4a).]
Patterns of cell-state transitions related to cell cycle and gr response, with biased transitions between different cell cycle phases.

Text 252
10.1038/s41467-020-15543-y
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 3 effectorness gradient in resting cd4+ t cells. a umap of single-cell rna-seq data from resting t cells. colors represent cells in the five clusters defined using top variable genes and unsupervised clustering. bar plots represent the proportion of cells assigned to different clusters in each biological replicate. b gene markers of each cell cluster (wilcoxon rank sum test) combined with well known markers from the literature. colors encode the mean expression of each gene in each cluster. c branched pseudotime trajectory, each cell is colored by its pseudotime value (left panel) or its cluster label (right panel), as determined in a. d heatmap of genes variable along the pseudotime trajectory (from monocle). the x axis represents cells ordered by pseudotime (from left to right) and different colors correspond to the scaled (z-scored) expression of each gene in each cell. source data are provided as a source data file.']. Reference sentences:[these effects were concordant between rna and proteins (supplementary fig 3).as we observed high correlation between rna and protein expression (supplementary fig 3a–c) we applied a multi-omics approach which leveraged both layers of information to derive cell state gene signatures (methods).we identified five distinct groups of cells (fig 3a) which we annotated as tn tcm tem temra and natural t regulatory (ntreg) cells based on the expression of well established cell type markers (fig 3b and supplementary data 6).the proportions of cells in each cell subpopulation were comparable across individuals (fig 3a).to investigate the relationships between these states we applied pseudotime analysis35 and observed that the cells formed a continuous progression starting in tn and gradually progressing towards tm (fig 3c).gzma gzmb and prf1) and cytokines and chemokines (il32 ccl4 and ccl5) (fig 3d and supplementary data 7).the cluster labels confirmed that cd4+ t cells formed a natural progression that started with naive t cells (tn) advanced towards central (tcm) then effector (tem) and finally highly effector (temra) memory t cells (fig 3c) with ntreg cells branching out.the enrichment scores estimated for these pathways were used to estimate the correlation between rna and protein using pearson correlation coefficients (supplementary fig 3c d).]
Summary: Trajectory analysis reveals a progression from naive to effector memory cells in CD4+ T cells, with distinct gene expression patterns along the trajectory.

Text 253
10.1038/s41467-020-15543-y
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 4 the effectorness gradient is preserved after t cell activation. a th0-stimulated tn and tm cells ordered in a branched pseudotime trajectory. cells are colored by cell type (top panel) or effectorness (bottom panel). b heatmap of the most variable genes along the th0 pseudotime trajectory (methods). the x axis represents cells ordered by effectorness (from left to right) and colors correspond to the scaled (z-scored) expression of each gene in each cell. c mapping of th0-stimulated cells to their corresponding resting t cell populations. integration of resting and th0-stimulated cells using canonical correlation analysis (methods) followed by umap embedding. cells are colored by activation status (resting vs th0, top panel) or cell type (bottom panel). d density plots highlighting the location of cell clusters as defined in resting state. e umap embedding color-coded by the effectorness values of resting and stimulated cells. source data are provided as a source data file.']. Reference sentences:[first we isolated tn and tm from four healthy individuals and quantified gene expression in the resting state using droplet-based scrna-seq33 with all replicates for the same cell type in a single reaction (methods and supplementary fig 4).ccl3 ccl4 gzmb gmza; fig 4a b).following integration of resting and stimulated cells (fig 4c) we observed that the pattern in the resting state persisted upon activation with a gradual progression of cells from tn to tcm tem and temra cells (fig 4d and supplementary data 7).independently of stimulation cells with the lowest effectorness localized to the tn area while cells with higher effectorness localized to the tcm tem and temra areas (fig 4e).in general over 85% of cells were unambiguously assigned to an individual (supplementary fig 4).]
Summary: The trajectory of effectorness in T cells from resting to activated states is preserved, with cells progressing from naive to memory subsets.

Text 254
10.1038/s41467-020-15543-y
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 3 effectorness gradient in resting cd4+ t cells. a umap of single-cell rna-seq data from resting t cells. colors represent cells in the five clusters defined using top variable genes and unsupervised clustering. bar plots represent the proportion of cells assigned to different clusters in each biological replicate. b gene markers of each cell cluster (wilcoxon rank sum test) combined with well known markers from the literature. colors encode the mean expression of each gene in each cluster. c branched pseudotime trajectory, each cell is colored by its pseudotime value (left panel) or its cluster label (right panel), as determined in a. d heatmap of genes variable along the pseudotime trajectory (from monocle). the x axis represents cells ordered by pseudotime (from left to right) and different colors correspond to the scaled (z-scored) expression of each gene in each cell. source data are provided as a source data file.']. Reference sentences:[these effects were concordant between rna and proteins (supplementary fig 3).as we observed high correlation between rna and protein expression (supplementary fig 3a–c) we applied a multi-omics approach which leveraged both layers of information to derive cell state gene signatures (methods).we identified five distinct groups of cells (fig 3a) which we annotated as tn tcm tem temra and natural t regulatory (ntreg) cells based on the expression of well established cell type markers (fig 3b and supplementary data 6).the proportions of cells in each cell subpopulation were comparable across individuals (fig 3a).to investigate the relationships between these states we applied pseudotime analysis35 and observed that the cells formed a continuous progression starting in tn and gradually progressing towards tm (fig 3c).gzma gzmb and prf1) and cytokines and chemokines (il32 ccl4 and ccl5) (fig 3d and supplementary data 7).the cluster labels confirmed that cd4+ t cells formed a natural progression that started with naive t cells (tn) advanced towards central (tcm) then effector (tem) and finally highly effector (temra) memory t cells (fig 3c) with ntreg cells branching out.the enrichment scores estimated for these pathways were used to estimate the correlation between rna and protein using pearson correlation coefficients (supplementary fig 3c d).the enrichment scores estimated for these pathways were used to estimate the correlation between rna and protein using pearson correlation coefficients (supplementary fig 3c d).]
Summary: Trajectory analysis reveals a continuous progression of cell states from naive to effector memory T cells, with distinct gene expression patterns along the trajectory.

Text 255
10.1038/s41467-020-15543-y
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 4 the effectorness gradient is preserved after t cell activation. a th0-stimulated tn and tm cells ordered in a branched pseudotime trajectory. cells are colored by cell type (top panel) or effectorness (bottom panel). b heatmap of the most variable genes along the th0 pseudotime trajectory (methods). the x axis represents cells ordered by effectorness (from left to right) and colors correspond to the scaled (z-scored) expression of each gene in each cell. c mapping of th0-stimulated cells to their corresponding resting t cell populations. integration of resting and th0-stimulated cells using canonical correlation analysis (methods) followed by umap embedding. cells are colored by activation status (resting vs th0, top panel) or cell type (bottom panel). d density plots highlighting the location of cell clusters as defined in resting state. e umap embedding color-coded by the effectorness values of resting and stimulated cells. source data are provided as a source data file.']. Reference sentences:[first we isolated tn and tm from four healthy individuals and quantified gene expression in the resting state using droplet-based scrna-seq33 with all replicates for the same cell type in a single reaction (methods and supplementary fig 4).ccl3 ccl4 gzmb gmza; fig 4a b).following integration of resting and stimulated cells (fig 4c) we observed that the pattern in the resting state persisted upon activation with a gradual progression of cells from tn to tcm tem and temra cells (fig 4d and supplementary data 7).independently of stimulation cells with the lowest effectorness localized to the tn area while cells with higher effectorness localized to the tcm tem and temra areas (fig 4e).in general over 85% of cells were unambiguously assigned to an individual (supplementary fig 4).in general over 85% of cells were unambiguously assigned to an individual (supplementary fig 4).]
Summary: The trajectory of effectorness in T cells from resting to activated states, with cells progressing from less to more effector states.

Text 256
10.1016/j.cell.2020.03.048
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 2. characterization of tumor-infiltrating myeloid cells by scrna-seq in human crc (a) t-sne plot showing 9 myeloid clusters (left) and expression levels of selected genes (right) (smart-seq2 scrna-seq). (b) bubble heatmap showing marker genes across 9 myeloid clusters from (a). dot size indicates fraction of expressing cells, colored according to z-score normalized expression levels. (c) tissue prevalence estimated by ro/e score (103 scrna-seq) (star methods). (d) heatmap showing expression patterns of selected genes across indicated myeloid clusters (103 scrna-seq). (e and f) inferred developmental trajectory of randomly selected monocytes and macrophages by rna velocity (e) and monocytes and macrophages enriched in tumors by urd (f) (103 scrna-seq). cells are colored according to their cluster origins. see also figure s4 and table s2.']. Reference sentences:[among these clusters mast cells (hm01) expressed a unique set of genes such as tpsab1/2 cpa3 ms4a2 and kit (figure 2b) and in contrast to lung cancer (lavin et al. 2017) showed com- parable enrichment in both tumors and normal mucosa (fig- ure 2c) in line with their contribution to the homeostasis of gut bacteria and regulation of inﬂammation in crc (blatner et al. 2010; krystel-whittemore et al. 2016).three dc subsets (hm02-hm04) plasmacytoid dc (pdc) cdc2 and cdc1 cells characterized by high expression of hla-drs and low expression of cd14 (figures s4b and s4c) were also identified and were further distinguished by specific expression of lilra4/lilrb4 cd1c/fcer1a and xcr1/ batf3 respectively (figure 2b).these dcs all showed compa- rable enrichment in both crc tumors and normal mucosa (figure 2c).among them clusters showing comparable (hm08) or preferential enrichment (hm09 and hm10) in normal mucosa versus tumors were denoted as resident tissue macrophages (rtms) whereas the remaining tumor-enriched clusters were denoted as tams (hm12-hm13; figure 2c).expression of the proinﬂammatory cytokine gene il1b was observed in all rtm populations with nlrp3+ rtms showing the highest expression (figure 2d) consistent with the role of the nlrp3 inﬂammasome in activation of il-1b and regulation of intestinal homeostasis (zaki et al. 2011).while both nlrp3+ and pltp+ rtms showed lower expression of the hla-dr gene compared with il1b+ rtms the pltp+ rtms exhibited specific expression of lyve1 and il10 (figure 2d) resembling recently reported ly- ve1himhciilo monocyte-derived rtms which mostly reside alongside blood vessels and possessed a critical role in restrain- ing inﬂammation and fibrosis (chakarov et al. 2019).using rna velocity analysis (la manno et al. 2018) embedded on a diffusion map to infer the future fate of cells we identified a strong directional ﬂow from cd14-express- ing monocytes toward fcn1+ monocyte-like cells and different macrophage populations (figure 2e).indeed a fraction of nlrp3+ rtms were still present inside the tumor (figure 2c) suggesting that they could convert to spp1+ tams in the tme.cell 181 442–459 april 16 2020 445 b blood normal tumor per 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 exp tsne1 tsne2 myeloid cells (smart-seq2 ) a myeloid cells (smart-seq2 ) log2 (tpm+1) c hm02 hm03 hm01 hm04 hm05 hm06 hm08 hm12 hm13 −30 −20 −10 0 10 20 −20 −10 0 10 20 −20 −10 0 10 20 −20 −10 0 10 20 −20 −10 0 10 20 −20 −10 0 10 20 −30 −20 −10 0 10 20 −30 −20 −10 0 10 20 tsne1 tsne2 fcgr3a c1qc spp1 nlrp3 tpsab1 cd1c batf3 cd14 840 12 16 0 1 2 3 4 5 hm01 hm02 hm03 hm04 hm05 hm06 hm08 hm13 hm12 tpsab1 cpa3 tpsb2 tpsd1 hdc slc18a2 gata2 ms4a2 kit il1rl1 hpgds vwa5a gzmb tcf4 jchain mzb1 irf7 il3ra slc15a4 irf4 spib serpinf1 itm2c plac8 irf8 lilrb4 axl fcer1a cd1c fcgr2b cd1e cd1a pkib clec10a cst7 dapp1 flt3 c1orf54 ccr7 ido1 cd40 batf3 xcr1 anpep s100a8 vcan s100a9 cd36 s100a12 cd14 tcf7l2 ifitm2 mtss1 fcgr3a serpina1 siglec10 rhoc cx3cr1 ms4a7 lilrb1 lilra1 nlrp3 ereg itgax il1b vegfa ccl3 apoe c1qb c1qa c1qc cd81 trem2 acp5 apoc1 prdm1 csf1r slamf8 cstb spp1 fn1 abl2 pparg sdc4 rgcc adm marco −2 10−1 2 d apoc1 apoe hla−drb5 hla−drb1 hla−dra hla−dqb2 hla−dqb1 hla−dqa2 hla−dqa1 hla−dpb1 hla−dpa1 hla−dob hla−doa hla−dmb hla−dma c1qc c1qb c1qa il10 lyve1 il1b hm08 hm09 hm10 hm12 hm13 −1.6 0.0 1.6 exp f hm10 hm11 hm08 e hm11 hm05 hm11 hm01_mast−tpsab1 hm02_pdc−lilra4 hm03_cdc2−cd1c hm04_cdc1−batf3 hm05_mono−cd14 hm06_mono−cd16 hm07_mono−cd14cd16 hm08_macro−nlrp3 hm09_macro−pltp hm10_macro−il1b hm11_monolike−fcn1 hm12_tam−c1qc hm13_tam−spp1 ro/e hm05_mono−cd14 hm06_mono−cd16 hm07_mono−cd14cd16 hm08_macro−nlrp3 hm09_macro−pltp hm10_macro−il1b hm11_monolike−fcn1 hm12_tam−c1qc hm13_tam−spp1 −0.02 −0.01 0.00 0.01 0.02 −0.04 −0.02 0.00 0.02 hm12 hm13 hm06 hm01_mast−tpsab1 hm02_pdc−lilra4 hm03_cdc2−cd1c hm04_cdc1−batf3 hm05_mono−cd14 hm06_mono−cd16 hm08_macro−nlrp3 hm12_tam−c1qc hm13_tam−spp1 0 0.8 0.37 0.04 1.37 1.38 1.34 0.01 0 0.02 0.32 0 0 3.53 1.25 3.73 4.76 0.1 0.08 0.31 4.1 12.19 7.68 0.8 1.5 0.16 3.51 1.61 2.12 2.9 0.05 0.04 0.08 3.24 0.05 1.8 3.49 4.33 4.87 pseudotime figure 2.446 cell 181 442–459 april 16 2020 a b c d e f g h (legend on next page) cell 181 442–459 april 16 2020 447 dichotomous functional phenotypes of tams in human crc in contrast to breast cancer and lung cancer tams that showed a continuous spectrum of phenotypes in the tme (azizi et al. 2018; lambrechts et al. 2018) the tams in crc exhibited a remarkable dichotomy (figure 2f) suggestive of defined cellular differentiation pathways.(c) projection of tam clusters by expression of angiogenesis- and phagocytosis-related genes on urd map in figure 2f.to get a clearer pseudo-temporal ordering of all monocytes and macrophages enriched in tumors (hm08 hm10 hm11 hm12 hm13) another algorithm urd (version 1.0.1) (farrell et al. 2018) was also applied to reconstruct the developmental trajectories into a tree structure (figure 2f).]
Summary: Trajectory patterns of monocytes and macrophages in tumor microenvironment, inferred by RNA velocity and URD analysis, showing differentiation pathways and cellular ordering.

Text 257
10.15252/embj.20105114
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 2. characterization of transient secretory (secretory3) cells. a pseudo-time trajectory projected onto a umap embedding of hbecs. the location of the secretory3 cell type is marked by a red outline. cell types are color-coded. numbers indicate the beginning of each pseudotime trajectory. b expression of goblet (top row) and ciliated cell markers (bottom row) in club, goblet, secretory3, and ciliated cells. c pseudo-time trajectory projected onto a umap embedding of hbecs. ppseudo-time values are color-coded. numbers indicate the beginning of each pseudotime trajectory. d cell type composition along a binned pseudo-time axis. the earliest stages are located on the left. e pathway enrichment values for secretory3-specific marker genes.']. Reference sentences:[as airway epithelial cells are known to continuously renew in a series of differentiation events involving nearly all major hbe cell types in a single trajectory we mapped the “secretory3” cells according to their position in this hierarchy using reversed graph embedding implemented in monocle as pseudo-time mapping (fig 2a; qiu et al 2017).“secretory3” cells were found at an intermediate posi- tion between club or goblet cells and ciliated cells (fig 2a) which could be confirmed by shared marker gene expression (fig 2b).this placed “secretory3” cells at a point shortly before terminal differen- tiation is reached (fig 2c and d).in agreement with ongoing differentiation toward an epithelial cell lineage the cell-specific markers of the transient secretory cells showed an enrichment of rho gtpases and their related pathways (fig 2e).4 of 15 the embo journal e105114 | 2020 ª 2020 the authors the embo journal soeren lukassen et al −10 −5 0 5 −10 −5 0 5 10 umap 1 umap 2 −10 − −5 0 5 −10 −5 0 5 10 umap 1 6420 8 club goblet secretory3 ciliated2 ciliated1 expression level scgb1a1 210 3 club goblet secretory3 ciliated2 ciliated1 expression level xbp1 0 2 4 club goblet secretory3 ciliated2 ciliated1 expression level vmo1 43210 5 club goblet secretory3 ciliated2 ciliated1 expression level pigr 3210 4 club goblet secretory3 ciliated2 ciliated1 expression level tuba1a 43210 5 club goblet secretory3 ciliated2 ciliated1 expression level tubb4b 3210 4 club goblet secretory3 ciliated2 ciliated1 expression level plaur 0 1 2 3 club goblet secretory3 ciliated2 ciliated1 expression level isg20 −10 −5 0 5 −10 −5 0 5 10 umap 1 umap 2 0 10 20 30 40 pseudotime 0 25 50 75 100 pseudotime % of cells basal1 basal2 basal3 basal_mitotic club goblet secretory1 secretory2 secretory3 ciliated1 ciliated2 foxn4 ionocyte a b c d e club secretory3 transient secretory goblet ciliated human bronchial epithelial cells pseudotime analysis human bronchial epithelial cells expression signatures 1 1 2 2 -log(10) p-value basal secretory3 transient secretory figure 2.]
Summary: Trajectory of secretory3 cells between club/goblet and ciliated cells, showing marker gene expression and pathway enrichment along differentiation stages.

Text 258
10.1038/s41467-020-15647-5
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 4 cthrc1+ cells express pathologic ecm genes in fibrotic lungs. a violin plots showing markers of cluster 8. b expression levels of col1a1 and cthrc1 on umap plots. cells from untreated lungs, bleomycin-treated lungs, or cluster 8 are shown separately in each column. c plish images for cthrc1 (white) or col1a1 (magenta) 14 days after bleomycin treatment. col-gfp is shown in green. dapi signal is shown in blue. h&e staining of serial section is also shown. arrowheads indicate co-localization of cthrc1 and col1a1 in gfp+ cells. scale bar, 50 μm. images are representative from three experiments (n ≥ 2). d rna velocity analysis overlaid on umap plot. direction indicates transition towards the estimated future state of a cell. e umap plot showing only clusters 0, 1, 2, and 8. f pseudotime trajectory analysis by monocle 2. g expression levels of pdgfra and col1a1 were analyzed along the pseudotime and fitted cubic smoothing spline curves are shown. the y-axis is scaled gene expression level. h pdgfra and col1a1 expression levels on umap plots.']. Reference sentences:[cluster 8 specifically expressed cthrc1 which was previously shown to be increased in bulk rna sequencing from the lungs of patients with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (ipf) (fig 4a)17.other markers for cluster 8 include ecm-related genes such as postn spp1 fn1 and tnc (fig 4a).col1a1 and col3a1 expression were also the highest in cluster 8 (fig 4a).feature plots of col1a1 and cthrc1 showed the correlation of the two genes in bleomycin-treated lungs (fig 4b).cthrc1 was specific for the population with the highest collagen expression and not significantly detected in other lung cells while the myofibroblast marker acta2 was predominantly expressed by low collagen-expressing cells (supplementary fig 4a).plish for cthrc1 and col1a1 in bleomycin-treated lung sections showed that cthrc1 was expressed at the periphery of clusters of col1a1+ cells in the alveolar region (fig 4c).vectors pointing into cluster 8 mostly came from cluster 2 which expresses multiple markers of alveolar fibroblasts (fig 4d).to further characterize the relevance of alveolar fibroblasts and cluster 8 we zoomed in on clusters 0 1 2 8 (fig 4e) and performed pseudotime trajectory analysis19.the resulting trajectory proposed a differentiation from cells in cluster 0 into clusters 1 and 2 with cells in cluster 8 forming a terminal state at the end (fig 4f).interestingly we found that the expression of alveolar fibroblast markers such as pdgfra npnt ces1d and tcf21 gradually decreased along the pseudotime towards cluster 8 (fig 4g h supplementary fig 4b) while ecm genes such as col1a1 col3a1 and col5a1 gradually increased along the pseudotime (fig 4g h supplementary fig 4b).after focusing on col1a1+ cells we found that a fraction of col1a1+ cells that expressed the highest levels of collagen and were mainly from bleomycin-treated lungs grouped together and expressed cluster 8 markers such as cthrc1 tnc spp1 and fst consistent with our findings (supplementary fig 4c).]
Patterns related to cell differentiation trajectory towards fibrotic state, with increased expression of ECM genes like col1a1 and cthrc1.

Text 259
10.1038/s41586-020-2222-z
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 1 | single-cell rna sequencing reveals fibroblast positional identity. a, umap projection of 35,153 synovial cells from patients with rheumatoid arthritis and patients with osteoarthritis (n = 6 for each condition). b, trajectory analysis of synovial fibroblasts. the black line represents the trajectory and fibroblasts are coloured by their position along the axis, from the sublining pole (blue, position 0) to the lining pole (grey, position 100). c, expression of the lining marker prg4 (top) and the sublining marker thy1 (bottom) along the positional axis. d–f, representative spatial analysis of synovial fibroblasts from patients with rheumatoid arthritis and patients with osteoarthritis (n = 5 for each condition). d, immunofluorescence microscopy']. Reference sentences:[after stringent quality control we obtained data on 35153 high-quality stromal cells that we corrected for donor-specific effects using har- mony6 (extended data fig 1a).we used graph-based clustering7 dif- ferential expression analysis and canonical markers to identify four major stromal subpopulations (fig 1a): vwf-expressing vascular endothelial cells prg4-expressing fibroblasts (prg4 encodes lubricin also known as proteoglycan 4 or prg4) thy1-expressing fibroblasts (thy1 encodes cd90) and mcam-expressing mural cells (mcam encodes cd146) (extended data fig 1b supplementary table 1).on the basis of previous studies48 we designated prg4-expressing cells as lining fibroblasts and thy1-expressing cells as sublining fibroblasts (extended data fig 1c).using flow cytometric analysis we confirmed that lining and sublining fibroblasts mural cells and vascular endothe- lial cells are the predominant stromal cell types in synovia (extended data fig 1e).flow cytometry data revealed that lining fibroblasts con- stitute the majority (48%) of stromal cells in osteoarthritis whereas in rheumatoid arthritis the synovium is characterized by the expansion of sublining fibroblasts (52% in rheumatoid arthritis compared with 31% in osteoarthritis p = 0.002) (extended data fig 1f).however in our scrna-seq dataset we found that lining and sublining fibro- blasts were not separated into entirely distinct clusters—instead the two populations were connected which suggests the presence of intermediate subpopulations (fig 1a).this is exemplified by the continuous non mutually exclusive distribution of the canonical sublining and lining fibroblast markers thy19 and prg410 in uniform manifold approximation and projection (umap) space (extended data fig 1c).we performed an unbiased trajectory analysis11 that models the linear transcriptional axis between sublining fibroblasts on one end lining fibroblasts on the other and transition states in the middle (fig 1b).we assigned each fibroblast a trajectory score along this axis ranging from 0 at the sublining end to 100 at the lining end (fig 1b).along this trajectory axis there is a gradual change in expression of the canonical markers prg4 and thy1 (fig 1c) and in samples from patients with rheumatoid arthritis we found more cells at the sublining pole of the gradient than at the lining pole; this is consistent with the expansion of thy1-expressing sublining fibroblasts during the course of the disease (extended data fig 1g).using an archetype-based analysis we confirmed that the intermedi- ate fibroblast states we observed were not technical artefacts arising from mrna contamination (extended data fig 1h i); moreover we identified a group of 71 functionally related genes that are expressed specifically in the intermediate states (extended data fig 1j k supplementary table 2).by analysing the expression of genes associated with the positional axis we found that mural cells were consistently grouped towards the sublining end (score 20 ± 11) of the axis (extended data fig 1d).to test this hypothesis directly we used confocal microscopy to visu- alize the anatomical distribution of cells expressing positional markers in synovial tissues—including vwf cd146 cd90 and prg4 (fig 1d).we used immunofluorescence staining to label vwf+ endothelial cells and determine the cd90:prg4 ratio in fibroblasts (fig 1e supplemen- tary table 3).) p < 6.6 × 10−14) (fig 1f supplementary data).fibroblasts within 10–30 μm of an endothelial cell had the highest cd90:prg4 ratio whereas those more than 100 μm away had the lowest (fig 1f); this gradual decrease in cd90:prg4 ratio with increasing distance from endothelial cells is consistent with the positional hypothesis.as expected we observed high expression of the mural-cell marker cd146 in cells that were nearest to endothe- lial cells (fig 1f).to identify subpopulations of endothelial cells we subclustered the previously identified vascular endothelial cluster (fig 1a) into arterial and venous populations.article extended data fig 1 | characterization of synovial stromal cells by scrna-seq and flow cytometry.4 nature research | reporting summary october 2018 instrument bd facsaria fusion and bd fortessa software flowjo cell population abundance stromal cells were gated on markers pdpn cd146 cd31 and cd90 as depicted in extended data figure 1e.for cell sorting experiments cells were isolated >99% purity gating strategy synovial stromal cells were gated on markers pdpn cd146 cd31 and cd90 as depicted in extended data figure 1e.]
Summary: Trajectory analysis reveals a continuum of fibroblast states from sublining to lining, with gradual changes in marker expression.

Text 260
10.1038/s41586-020-2222-z
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 2 | endothelial cells establish sublining fibroblast positional identity. a, rna-seq profiles of cd90+ (red) and cd90− (blue) fibroblasts at the indicated passage number (fresh, n = 7 and n = 15; passage 1, n = 7 and n = 16; passage 2, n = 4 and n = 8) projected onto the scrna-seq trajectory embedding of fresh fibroblasts (black line). b, apical view of a fibroblast organoid (top) and a mixed-cell (fibroblast + endothelial cell) organoid (bottom). scale bar, 1 mm. c, representative haematoxylin and eosin staining of synovial organoids (n = 4) showing the synovial lining (top) and the sublining (bottom). scale bar, 50 μm. d, confocal microscopy images of organoids (n = 3) in which fibroblasts were stained with pkh67 (green) and endothelial cells were stained with pkh26 (red). the arrow indicates endothelial tubules with surrounding fibroblasts. scale bar, 100 μm. e, projection of scrna-seq profiles of fibroblast organoids (top, n = 4,336 cells) and mixed-cell organoids (bottom, n = 2,076 cells) onto the umap embedding of synovial tissue cells. cells derived from organoids are coloured in orange and cells from synovial tissue (n = 35,153 cells) are coloured in grey.']. Reference sentences:[we repeated and confirmed this spatial trend using three additional positional markers that were identified in our trajec- tory analysis: sublining-enriched γ-glutamyltransferase-5 (ggt5) lining-enriched cd55 and podoplanin (pdpn) (extended data fig 2 supplementary tables 4–6 supplementary data).by projecting transcriptomic profiles of fresh and in vitro-passaged fibroblasts onto the position gradient trajectory14 we found that—after serial passages ex vivo—the tran- scriptional profiles of thy1-expressing and thy1-non-expressing fibro- blasts converge which suggests a loss of positional identity (fig 2a).histologically two discrete zones were formed: a fibroblast lining and a sublining enriched with endothelial tubules (fig 2c).extended data fig 2 | spatial analysis of synovial fibroblast positional markers.]
Summary: Trajectory analysis reveals convergence of positional identities in fibroblasts, forming distinct zones in organoids.

Text 261
10.1038/s41593-020-0621-y
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 2 | identification of cell types. a, a t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding plot depicting the ~73,000 cells in 26 clusters identified after strict quality control of initial clusters. endo, endothelial; l, layer; micro/macro, microglia/macrophage. b, cell-type annotation was performed on the basis of the expression of well-established marker genes. left: dendrogram representing the relationship between identified cell-type clusters based on gene expression. middle: dot plot depicting the expression of known marker genes in the 26 clusters of interest. marker genes are color coded according to the cell type in which they should be detected. the size of the dots represents the proportion of cells expressing the gene (pct. exp.), whereas the color intensity represents the average expression level (avg. exp. scale). right: the columns list the number of cells per group and the bar plot depicts the mean number of umis per cell in each cluster. c, cortical-layer-specific markers varied in expression within the excitatory neuronal clusters. the violin plots depict the expression per cluster of layer-specific marker genes, from the more superficial layers (i/ii) on the bottom to the deeper layers (v/vi) on the top. d, known classes of inhibitory neurons were identifiable based on the expression pattern of peptide genes (vip, sst and cck) and calcium-binding protein genes (pvalb). e, top: ol cells from five clusters were analyzed to produce a pseudotime trajectory to gauge their developmental stages. bottom left: violin plots of cells belonging to the ol expressed the expected markers. bottom right: the location of these clusters along the trajectory was consistent with deconvolution25. the numbers represent the percentage contribution of each of the previously published25 cluster signatures to the corresponding clusters in our dataset. cops, committed opcs; imoigs, immune oligodendroglia. for the violin plots in c–e, values extend from minimum to maximum, the median value is indicated by a dot, and the n value per cluster corresponds to the total ‘no. of cells’ for cases and controls combined listed in b. nuclei were derived from 34 brains.']. Reference sentences:[to iden- tify different cell types present in the brain samples we applied unsupervised graph-based clustering19 using the first 50 principal components (pcs) derived from the 2135 most variable genes across individual nuclei (methods and supplementary fig 2a–b).after stringent quality control (methods) we identified 26 distinct clusters (fig 2a).gene expression patterns specific to cell-type clusters were visual- ized using various methods including a dot plot (fig 2b) average and median gene expression heatmaps (supplementary fig 4a–b) and violin plots (fig 2c–e) to form a consensus for annotation.in fig 2c the genes are arranged from left to right in order of their expression across the cortical lay- ers (from layer i/ii to layer vi).for example inhib_7 was classified as inhibitory parvalbumin (pvalb) because it expressed gad1 and pvalb and lacked vip and sst (fig 2d).we identified five distinct cell type clusters that fell into the oligo- dendrocyte lineage (ol) including two that we classified as opcs (fig 2e).our results indicated that opc2 were the youngest cells within the dataset fol- lowed by opc1 then oligos2 and oligos3 with oligos1 being the most mature (fig 2e top).to compare our ol cells with previously described ol cell types we performed bioinformatic deconvolution (fig 2e bottom).the immune gene expression feature of oligos3 is highlighted in our hierarchical clustering dendrogram (fig 2b) in which oligos3 is located closer to the ‘micro/macro’ cluster compared with the other ol clusters.0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 0 7000 012 –1 oligos1 opc1 opcs 2 astros_2 astros_3 endo micro/macro oligos2 oligos3 inhib_1 inhib_2_vip inhib_3_sst inhib_7_pval inhib_7_pval inhib_5 inhib_6_sst ex4_l6 ex8_l5_6 ex6_l4_6 ex7_l4_6 e 9_l5_6 ex10_l2_4 ex1_l5_6 ex2_l5 ex3_l4_5 ex5_l5 spi mrc1 tmem119 cx3cr1 cldn5 vtn glul glul sox9 aqp4 gja1 ndrg2 gfap aldh1a1 aldh1l1 vim ptgds pdgfra pcdh15 olig2 olig1 plp1 mag mog mobp mbp satb2 slc17a7 slc17a6 gad2 gad1 slc3aa1 snap25 stmn2 rbfox3 ex5_l5 ex2_l5 endo inhib_3_sst ex8_l5_6 ex3_l4_5 ex9_l5_6 ex6_l4_6 ex7_l4_6 ex10_l2_4 ex1_l5_6 inhib_6_sst inhib_8_pvalb micro/macro inhib_7_pvalb inhib_5 ex4_l6 astros_2 astro_3 oligos3 oligos1 inhib_1 oligos2 opc2 opc1 fig 2 | identification of cell types.based on the pc elbow plot of the standard deviation of the pcs (supplementary fig 2a) the first 50 pcs were retained for use in the downstream analysis.we then repeated this clustering and merging process for the nuclei within each terminal node until none of the remaining nodes fulfilled our cut-off criteria (supplementary fig 2b).the resulting set of 30 clusters were then characterized in terms of known marker genes of all major well-defined brain cell types (supplementary fig 2c–d).the pseudotime trajectory was then plotted with plot_cell_ trajectory (fig 2e) and the change in expression of genes known to be involved in oligodendrocyte development were plotted using plot_genes_in_pseudotime (supplementary fig 6b–i).]
Summary: Trajectory patterns of oligodendrocyte lineage cells were analyzed to determine developmental stages and compared with known cell types.

Text 262
10.1038/s41593-020-0624-8
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 1 | a cell atlas of the hippocampus reveals unique daas in ad. a, overview of the experimental strategy. b, cell map of mouse hippocampus in wt and ad. t-sne of 54,769 single-nucleus rna profiles from hippocampi of 7-month-old male mice, four wt and four 5xfad (ad); colored by cluster. right: hierarchical cluster tree. c, changes in frequency of multiple cell types in ad. right: boxplot showing fraction of nuclei per cluster in wt and ad mice. box, 75% and 25% quantiles. line, median. dots, individual samples. left: log ratio of average fraction in wt versus ad. asterisks denote statistically significant differences between ad and wt (n=8 animals, two-sided p<0.01, paired t-test or wilcoxon test for nonnormally distributed samples). d, a continuous trajectory across three major astrocyte states in ad and wt brains. diffusion map embedding of 7,345 wt and ad astrocytes, colored by cluster (gray, cells of other conditions). the three end states are marked: gfap-low, gfap-high and daa. inset: map colored by gfap expression level. e, marker genes of astrocyte states. expression level (color scale) of marker genes across clusters and the percentage of cells expressing them (dot size). f, an increase in frequency of daas and reduction in frequency of homeostatic gfap low astrocytes in ad. boxplot (as in c) showing the fraction of nuclei per cluster in wt and ad. asterisks denote statistically significant differences between ad and wt (n=8 animals; statistical test as in c). similar proportions found in cortical brain region and in female mice, see extended data fig 4a–i.']. Reference sentences:[we used snuc-seq11 to build a cellular-molecular map of the hip- pocampi of 7-month-old mice of either wt or a transgenic model of ad (5xfad)12 (8 mice 54769 high-quality nuclei; fig 1a and supplementary table 1) using two different protocols to compre- hensively capture nuclei across cell types (extended data fig 1a–c).we partitioned the cells into 23 clusters (fig 1b and extended data fig 1 and 2) revealing largely similar cellular landscapes in wt and ad with differences in the proportions of several cell popula- tions (p < 0.01; fig 1c).there were major differences in astrocyte states in ad relative to wt (fig 1c) as well as prominent differ- ences in ad microglia the frequency of which increased along dis- ease progression (relative to all other cells; fig 1c) including the disease-associated microglia (dam) population1 (extended data fig 2c).the frequency of pericyte/endothelial cells also increased in ad (p < 0.01; fig 1c) while that of recently activated pyramidal neurons decreased (p < 0.01; fig 1c and extended data fig 2d).several rare stromal populations also decreased in frequency (p < 0.01; fig 1c and extended data fig 2e).a continuous range of astrocyte profiles (extended data fig 3a–c) were aligned on a diffusion map along trajectories between three transcriptional states (fig 1d and extended data fig 3d).the cells were partitioned into six transcriptional sub- clusters (fig 1de and extended data fig 3a) and their propor- tions in the various states differed between ad and wt (fig 1f and extended data fig 3e) with the appearance of a unique state observed only in ad.in ad an additional astrocyte gfap-high state was found which we termed disease-associated astrocytes (daas; cluster 4; fig 1f).in addition cluster 5 (in wt and ad) reflected a transitional-like intermediate state between the gfap-low state and gfap-high states (cluster 6) while cluster 3 which significantly increased in frequency in ad (fig 1f) reflected a transitional-like intermediate state between the gfap-low state and the daa (cluster 4; fig 1de).among the daa-upregulated genes were serpina3n encoding a serine protease inhibitor linked to increased amyloid accu- mulation15 and ctsb (cathepsin b) encoding a lysosomal cysteine protease involved in proteolytic processing of amyloid precursor protein16 (fig 1e and 2a and extended data fig 4j).examining the diffusion map (fig 1d and 3c and extended data fig 7) suggested that gfap-low astrocytes are the potential source population of both gfap-high astrocytes and daas (fig 3c).embedding of 23863 astrocytes in diffusion map (as in fig 1d) highlighting cells per age and condition (top wt; bottom ad) colored by inferred cluster identity (from fig 1d consistent with independent clustering and diffusion map embedding of time-course data in extended data fig 7).specifically for the 7-month hippocampus male mouse dataset astrocyte clusters 1 and 2 from fig 1b were combined and used in all of the downstream analysis.comparison of astrocyte profiles across two groups (that is sex in extended data fig 4a–d or brain regions in extended data fig 4e–i) was done by integrated clustering of cells from the two groups (that is males and females or hippocampus and cortex samples) and annotating the de novo clusters by projecting the astrocyte clusters defined for the hippocampus of 7-month-old male mice (from fig 1d).to annotate the clusters we used a similar analysis based on the cca2233 approach (using seurat v.3) to project the cluster identities (ids) from the 7-month-old mouse dataset (ids as in fig 1d) to the integrated set.for comparison of expression profiles of clusters across regions or sex we used the top marker genes identified for the 7-month male hippocampus mice (as in fig 1e) of the three major astrocyte states daas homeostatic gfap-low and gfap-high.the time-course dataset consisted of four datasets (or batches) a 7-month-old mice dataset (including four 5xfad and wt mice from the dataset in fig 1 and 2 of samples prepared with ez lysis buffer to match the conditions at the other time points) and three additional datasets from 5xfad and wt mice ranging in age from 1.5 to 20-months (supplementary table 1).the diffusion map embedding of the time-course dataset aligned cells along two continuous trajectories a gfap-low to gfap-high trajectory and a homeostatic-daas trajectory (shown in extended data fig 7) which matched the trajectories found for the 7-month-old mice (fig 1d).notably for consistency and clarity in fig 3 we show the embedding of the time-course datasets in the diffusion map of the 7-month-old mice (as in fig 1d which was done as described in the next section “dynamic modeling k-nn embedding and gene expression dynamics”).however for visualization and annotation purposes we embedded the time-course data into the diffusion map of the 7-month dataset (fig 1d) using a k-nn approach.similarly we predicted the cluster ids (as in fig 1d) of embedded cells using a weighted majority vote based on the cluster ids of their k neighbors using the same relative normalized weights as above.finally cluster identity was assigned to the human clusters using the cca approach (seurat v.3) using the data and cluster ids of 7-month-old male mice as refernec (as in fig 1d and supplementary table 1; following the steps detailed in the section “comparison across brain regions and sex by cca integrated analysis”).the number of cells per population varied (as shown in fig 1 and extended data fig 1).for fig 1 are presented with the paper.cluster numbers as in fig 1b.c 2-d tsne embedding of single nuclei rna profiles from hippocampus of wt and 5xfad mice (as in fig 1b) colored by (from left to right): batch mouse strain (wt or ad) and sample.left: the hierarchical cluster tree and annotations of clusters as in fig 1b.2-d tsne embedding of single nuclei rna profiles from hippocampi of wt and 5xfad mice (as in fig 1b) colored by expression levels of marker genes: grin2b (neurons) gad2 (gabaergic neurons) vcan (oligodendrocytes precursor cells opcs) hmha1 (microglia) flt1 (endothelial) vtn (pericytes) plp1 (oligodendrocytes) slc1a3 (astrocytes) gfap (astrocytes) rarres2 (ependymal/npcs) slc6a13 (fibroblasts) homer1 (immediate early gene iegs).cluster numbers as in fig 1b.left: dot plot as in (b) showing the expression of immediate early genes (iegs) across all clusters (as in fig 1b) showing cluster 23 capturing pyramidal neurons expressing iegs.dot plots as in (b) showing the expression level across all clusters (rows as in fig 1b) of markers found to be specific to cells classified as (from left to right): ependymal/npcs fibroblasts and pericytes.a 2-d umap25 embedding of 7345 single nuclei rna profiles of astrocytes (as in fig 1d) from hippocampus of 4 wt (left) and 4 5xfad (ad right) 7-month old mice.box plots showing the fraction of each astrocyte cluster (compared to total number of astrocyte cells clusters as in fig 1d n=8 animals 10 samples) in wt and 5xfad mice.the three astrocyte end states are marked on the graph (annotated by projection from fig 1d methods).b tsne embedding as in (a) colored by cluster 4 (daa) and cluster 6 (gfap-low) cluster ids of male mice as in fig 1d (other cells in grey).g tsne embedding as in (e) colored by predicted cluster id of hippocampal astrocytes from 7-month old male mice (inferred by cca2233 projections as in fig 1d methods).heat map showing the correspondence between the de novo cluster ids (rows from (e)) of the cross regional dataset and the predicted cluster ids (columns) using the hippocampal astrocytes cluster ids as reference (as from fig 1d).left: average expression level (color scale) and the percent of cells expressing (dot size) marker genes for: gfap-low (slc7a10; trpm3) daa (ctsb16; csmd1 associated with cognitive functions; c4b encoding complement factor 4; vim a marker of adult neurogenesis/nscs18) common to daa and gfap-high (cd9 expressed by neural stem cells like astrocytes) and gfap-high (sparcl1/hevin encoding astrocytes pro-synaptic protein; aqp4 an endfeet marker 14) (cells clusters as in fig 1e).colored by: cluster ids (in (a)) or predicted cluster ids (using reference cluster ids of astrocytes of 7-month old mice as in fig 1d in (b)).c the correspondence between the de novo cluster ids (columns) of the time course data and the predicted cluster ids (rows) from astrocytes of 7-month old mice (as in fig 1d).j 2-d embedding of the 15113 astrocytes of ad (left) and wt (right) cells across ages projected onto the diffusion map of 7-month old mice (by the weighted average position of the k-nn from fig 1d methods).for each cluster force field (black arrows) marking the directionality of transitions along the diffusion map28 (as in fig 1d) cells colored by cluster id.force field showing the directionality of transitions between the expected position in the diffusion map (weighted average position of k-nn among all wt cells k=10) to the true position along the diffusion map (as in fig 1d) for each cell.de novo tsne embedding of 3392 snuc-seq profiles of cortical human astrocytes from post-mortem aging brains of ad and non-ad individuals (n=48 from mathys et al.4) colored by de novo human cluster id (a) or by the predicted mouse cluster ids (b) (predicted by cca2233 projections from the mouse clusters as in fig 1d).c the average prediction scores (as color scale) and the percent of cells with score above 0 (as dot size) for the three major end-states mouse clusters (from fig 1d) across the human astrocyte clusters (as in a mathys et al.4).]
Summary: Identification of a continuous trajectory across different astrocyte states in Alzheimer's disease and wild-type brains, with a unique disease-associated astrocyte state observed only in Alzheimer's disease.

Text 263
10.1073/pnas.1918314117
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 3. ductal cells show transitional dynamism in pseudotime. (a) monocle-generated plots presenting pseudotime ordering and differentiation trajectory of cell clusters. color coding is as shown in fig 2a. clusters 4-5-6 are arranged in a manner that suggests ductal-acinar transition (bottom left arm), while activated/migrating progenitor-like cells (cluster 2) are saddled between the productal and ducto-acinar clusters. (b) monocle-generated plots showing pseudotime-ordered expression of selected marker genes: tff1 (cluster 2), spp1 (cluster 1), cpa2 (cluster 6), and akap12 (cluster 3). the color of a cell shows its cluster identity (as in fig 2a). lines denote relative expression of each marker in pseudotime. (c) umap plots and corresponding violin plots showing relative gene expression for markers previously associated with ductal progenitors. each dot in the violin plots represents the expression of a single cell, while the shape of the plot denotes probability density. scale bars denote average expression in gene counts.']. Reference sentences:[the results of this analysis after the bioinformatics removal of the immune cluster 7 are shown in fig 3 a and b.the top “ducto-acinar” arm of the graphic in fig 3a indicates that there is a pseudotemporal continuum with a progressive acquisition of acinarity following the sequence from clusters 4 (centroacinar) to 6 (transitional to acinar 2).as shown in fig 3c several have a widespread distribution (i.e. are found in both productal and ducto-acinar axes).the first (fig 4c) is similar to that previously shown in fig 3a qadir et al.taken together these observations suggest that 1) only a subset of cells from cluster 1 is progenitor-like and 2) alk3bright+/p2ry1+ sorting en- riches for the progenitor-like cells (pdx1+/alk3+/caii—) which are preferentially found within cluster 1. fig 3.consistent with this hypothesis is the observation that gp2 an acinar-to-ductal transitional marker (49) is almost exclusively detected in the ducto-acinar clusters 5 and 6 (fig 3d).]
Summary: Trajectory analysis reveals transitional dynamics in cell differentiation, with distinct clusters representing different stages along the pseudotime continuum.

Text 264
10.1038/s41586-020-2266-0
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 1 | developmental diversification of hypothalamic cell lineages. a, umap plot of 51,199 cells of ectodermal origin, integrated by canonical correlation analysis (cca) to achieve a hypothetical continuum that reflects the progressive attainment of cell identities. walktrap in igraph distinguished non-mature cells (clusters 11, 19) and neurons (31 proto-groups) at the end of each developmental trajectory. b, schemes illustrating the conformity of alignment and clustering in pseudotime (z-axis, calculated independently, top) and biological age (bottom). c, umap on paga representation of progenitors, glia and immature neurons (bridge cells). rna velocity12,13 transformed']. Reference sentences:[overall proto-groups of progenitors (2) tanycytes (2) astroependymal cells (2) immature oligodendrocytes (3) cells of the pars tuberalis (3) and neurons (33; fig 1a) reflecting diversity in the adult hypothalamus489 were specified by differentially expressed tfs (extended data fig 1) during development (fig 1b).semi-supervised analysis of 327 genes for enrichment high- lighted that the progression of bridge cells relied on the dominance of genes related to the regulation of pluripotency (sox2) neural stem cell differentiation (hes1 ascl1 rbpj dll1 and dll3 for notch signalling)1415 erk signalling (sox11) neuronal migration (dlx1 dlx2 dlx5 dlx6; subsequently referred to as dlx1/2/5/6) and morphogenesis (rbfox3; fig 1d)1617.the proposed waves of neurogenesis by self-renewing pro- genitors and early neuroblasts that ubiquitously express ascl1 along the third ventricle (fig 1d) were shown in ascl1-creert2::ai14 mice at e18.5 with recombination induced during the e12.5–e16.5 period (fig 1e) and validated in ascl1−/− mice presenting a restricted cohort of sox2+ immature precursors (extended data fig 2f).tdtomato+ progenies in the many hypothalamic subregions confirmed neurogenesis dur- ing mid-gestation with a gradual decline after e16.5 (fig 1e extended data fig 2d).in support of postnatal neurogenesis sox2+ precursors persisted in the wall of the third ventricle and generated progenies that progressed through ascl1+ and rbfox3+ (neun) stages (fig 1f extended data fig 2g h).intermediate states for gaba neurons within our integrated dataset about 47% of all cells committed to the neuronal lineage were in immature states (clusters 11 19; fig 1a 2a) before progressing towards final differentiation as suggested by the expression of homeobox genes that are thought to determine gaba identities (cluster 11 foxg1 and nkx2-3; number 19 sox2 sox11 gsx1 gsx2 e2f1 arx and pbx3; extended data fig 1).cluster 11 is composed of immature neurons that are largely homogeneous with low-level differential gene expression but express rate-limiting enzymes and transporters for gaba neurotransmission (extended data fig 1a 3a).a cellular clusters from fig 1a (without clusters 38 42 45 and oligodendrocytes) represented as a graph-like map upon transforming umap embedding with the paga method12 to assess cell differentiation trajectories.a a dendrogram of regulons for each cell cluster estimated in fig 1b.we applied a supervised approach that sampled stationary states (genes that are spatially restricted in both pre- and postnatal brains; fig 1d extended data fig 1) and integrated stages of fate transition and branching-off of differentiated neurons.early-expressed glial genes (hes1 fabp7 slc1a3 vim) marked progeni- tors (cells expressing for example sox2 dll1/3) in the innermost (‘ven- tricular’) zone of the third ventricle at e14.5–e15.5 (fig 1c extended data fig 7a b).committed progeny then unidirectionally distanced them- selves laterally (extended data fig 2d–g) and expressed protogenes for neuronal migration (dlx1/2/5/6 rbfox3; fig 1d).our hypothesis was corroborated by the approximately 90% co-expression of th and gad1 in immature neurons (fig 4d e extended data fig 9e) including in (bac)gad65–egfp and gad67–gfp mice (extended data fig 10a).to identify genes that promote gaba-to-dopamine phenotypic transitions we screened hypothalamic regulons for th as target and found that the expression patterns of master genes for the meis2 nfe2l1 dlx1 and pbx3 regulons cover the broad initiation of th expression at embryonic time points (extended data fig 10b).histochemistry specifi- cally tied the co-existence of onecut2/onecut3 and sncg pmfbp1a and nr4a2 to pevn dopamine neurons (fig 4g extended data fig 10c d).to further resolve the segregation of a14 neurons we identified substantial sst expression prenatally (with a gradual decay after birth) in onecut3+ dopamine neurons (fig 4h extended data fig 10e).10x genomics data pre-processing data derived at each time point were processed independently (sup- plementary fig 1 supplementary note).and learned umap embedding5767 (fig 1a extended data fig 3a7a d e supplementary note).for this reason we used clustering factors from the integration manifold by all field prevalent algorithms (graph-based algorithms mostly from the igraph package used in pagoda2 with default parameters on 37 pcs and separately on the corrected umi counts matrix and a small local movement algorithm with different resolutions via seurat’s findclus- ters function) for comparison (supplementary fig 10 supplementary note).we annotated the final 45 clusters by deg testing with mast52 (fig 1a 2a and extended data fig 1) on the sctransform-corrected651 log-normalized umi matrix (data slot in a seurat object).we used dendrograms to order our dot plots (extended data fig 1).next we used abstraction graph nodes as starting points for the umap algorithm with maxiter = 1000 nega- tive_sample_rate = 20 min_dist = 1 spread = 2 parameters to prepare embedding corresponding to cell lineage relations (fig 1b–d 2a b 3f 4a supplementary fig 11 supplementary note).finally we allocated root cells by using the backward markov process on the transition probability matrix to define excessive density area estimated the latent time on a learned transcription dynamic model and plotted a velocity grid and individual cell velocities embedded in umap space (fig 1c).for this purpose we used a probabilistic approach palantir93 which we implemented as an external module to the scanpy python package81 (fig 1d 4b extended data fig 7a supplementary fig 12 in supplementary note).similarly we applied this method to the pomc cell group (fig 2b) and every distinct th containing group (fig 4b–d f h i extended data fig 9c supple- mentary fig 13 in supplementary note) guided by paga topology.for fig 1a a umap plot was built for n = 51199 cells of ectodermal origin integrated by canonical correlation analysis (cca).for fig 1c n = 5070 cells were used for umap.for fig 1d (right) we sampled cell-ordering (n = 5070 cells) to 500 bins to compute gene expression trends.for fig 1e n = 2 animals for e12.5 3 n = animals for e13.5 and n = 3 animals for e15.5 were used for embryonal tracing of ascl1 at corresponding time points.for fig 1f n = 2 animals were used to trace ascl1+ cells in (bac)gad65–egfp:ascl1-creert2::ai14 mice (tamox- ifen injection at p14 sample collection at p21).for extended data fig 1 we used the dataset of n = 51199 ectodermal cells for dot-plot representation (extended data fig 1a b) and umap visualizations (extended data fig 1b c).for extended data fig 10a images are representative for the experiment performed in duplicate on n = 4 for each developmental stage of both mouse lines.for extended data fig 10b n = 26316 cells from the neuronal lineage (including progenitors) were used.for extended data fig 10c n = 3 ani- mals were tested for each developmental time-point.for extended data fig 10d n = 2 animals were tested for each independent experiment.for extended data fig 10e n = 2 animals were tested for the exper iment.for extended data fig 10f n = 9 onecut3+ neurons were recon- structed.extended data fig 1 | marker genes to define molecular phenotypes.colour coding and numbering at the top correspond to those in fig 1a.colour codes correspond to those in fig 1a.colour codes are consistent with those in fig 1a.h genetic tracing of ascl+ cells postnatally (as in fig 1f).extended data fig 10 | see next page for caption.article extended data fig 10 | gaba origin of hypothalamic dopamine neurons.therefore inferences on developmental trajectories were performed in an unsupervised manner as illustrated by figure 1b.]
Patterns related to the progression of cell identities along a hypothetical continuum, with distinct clusters representing different stages of development.

Text 265
10.1038/s41586-020-2266-0
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 4 | molecular configuration of hypothalamic dopamine systems. a, rna velocity vector embedding of th+ neurons. phenotypic convergence even for molecularly distant neurons is by uniform expression of th and other enzymes of dopamine synthesis. b th+ neurons invariably rely on ascl1 as revealed in pseudotime (left). genetic tracing in ascl1-creert2::ai14 mice showed the production of th+/ascl1+ progeny during the e12.5–e16.5 period. c, isl1 is expressed by all th+ dopamine subgroups (pseudotime; extended data fig 9d). d, pseudotime trajectories show that gad1, slc32a1 and th are co-expressed from the early fetal period. e, antiparallel expression of gad1 and th as a factor of medial-to-lateral positioning (extended data fig 9e). f, pseudotime trajectories for onecut2, onecut3 and slc6a3 (left) and earliest']. Reference sentences:[therefore we assigned regulons to each ectodermal cluster by combining 1962 tf chroma- tin immunoprecipitation and sequencing (chip–seq) assays for gene interactions and our scrna-seq data23 (fig 3a extended data fig 4) enriched positive interactions within 395 active regulons and estimated their prevalence per cell.rna velocity vector embedding for all th+ cells unequivo- cally identified ten molecularly distantly segregated neuronal clusters of which clusters 4 7 and 8 differentiated before e15.5 (fig 4a sup- plementary note).cascading ascl1 and isl1 expression was present in all dopamine neurons (fig 4b c extended data fig 9a–d) assigning these tfs to defining the entire dopamine class.indeed both ascl1-creert2::ai14 and isl1-cre::ai14 mice produced tdtomato+ dopamine cells particularly in the pevn (fig 4b extended data fig 9a b d) when induced at e12.5–e15.5.th+/ddc+/slc18a2+ dopamine neurons arise from seven spatially segregated groups of gaba cells (clusters 1 3 4 6 7 8 and 9; fig 4a).our hypothesis was corroborated by the approximately 90% co-expression of th and gad1 in immature neurons (fig 4d e extended data fig 9e) including in (bac)gad65–egfp and gad67–gfp mice (extended data fig 10a).developmentally onecut3 serves as the master gene of the regulon that typifies th/slc6a3 neurons (cluster 9) and is detectable in the preoptic progenitor area by e10.5 (fig 4f g).histochemistry specifi- cally tied the co-existence of onecut2/onecut3 and sncg pmfbp1a and nr4a2 to pevn dopamine neurons (fig 4g extended data fig 10c d).to further resolve the segregation of a14 neurons we identified substantial sst expression prenatally (with a gradual decay after birth) in onecut3+ dopamine neurons (fig 4h extended data fig 10e).on the basis of robo1 expression in the pseudotime scale we integrated chemotropic cues for the final positioning of onecut3+/th+ neurons by showing that there were many more of these cells in robo1−/− mice than in their wild-type littermates (fig 4i).finally onecut3 expression distinguishes pevn th+ neurons that produce a uniform electrophysi- ological signature that sets them apart amongst the nine dopamine subtypes tested (fig 4j extended data fig 8 10f) thus completing a differentiation trajectory that segregates pevn dopamine neurons from all other dopamine subtypes.we used a false discovery rate (fdr) of 0.01 with 2 × 105 permutations (supplementary fig 4 supplementary note).wilcoxon test logreg test87 and dot-plot visu- alization of differentially recruited regulons across 45 identified cell groups (described above) were done in the scanpy package81 (fig 3a extended data fig 4).we used dendrograms to order dot-plots (fig 3a extended data fig 4).similarly we applied this method to the pomc cell group (fig 2b) and every distinct th containing group (fig 4b–d f h i extended data fig 9c supple- mentary fig 13 in supplementary note) guided by paga topology.for fig 4b–d f h i to compute gene trends we independently sampled seven differentiation trajectories containing neurons (for group 1: 1506 cells for group 2: 997 cells for group 3: 1453 cells for group 5: 948 cells for group 6: 1779 cells and for group 9: 1181 cells) to 500 bins.for fig 4b (right) n = 2 animals for e12.5 n = 3 animals for e13.5.for fig 4e n = 2 animals were used.for fig 4f (right) n = 3 animals were used in the experiment.for fig 4g (right) n = 2 animals were tested in each inde- pendent experiment.for fig 4h (right) n = 2 animals were tested in the experiment.for fig 4i n = 5 (wild-type) and n = 6 (robo1−/−) mice were tested.for fig 4k post hoc neuroanatomical reconstruction identified that all n = 9 onecut3+ neurons were of ‘type c’ in a14 (n = 15 cells were characterized as ‘type c’ within 62 cells recorded in total from a14).for extended data fig 4 n = 33893 cells in total were tested with two-tailed wilcoxon rank sum test.extended data fig 4 | hierarchical relationship of grns (regulons).]
Summary: Trajectory patterns of gene expression in dopamine neurons during development, differentiation, and spatial segregation.

Text 266
10.1038/s41586-020-2266-0
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 2 | neuronal differentiation in the hypothalamus. a, cellular clusters from fig 1a (without clusters 38, 42, 45 and oligodendrocytes) represented as a graph-like map upon transforming umap embedding with the paga method12 to assess cell differentiation trajectories. red dotted line specifies the trajectory for pomc (cluster 40) neurons. b, prdm12 and nhlh2 expression (top left) and their developmental dynamics (in pseudotime) relative to pomc and cited1, a transcriptional co-activator that specifies neurons of arc (top right).']. Reference sentences:[rna velocity13 (as well as paga12; see supplementary note) demonstrated that the number of neuroblasts (‘bridge cells’) tailed off as a factor of age with an appreciable rupture of this cell continuum by birth (extended data fig 2b).additionally scrna-seq suggested the existence of an alter- native and embryonically restricted (<e15.5) pathway of hypothalamic neurogenesis that centred on tbr1+/eomes+ progenitors that reside at the thalamus–hypothalamus dorsal boundary (an ascl1− territory) and contribute multiple diencephalic neuronal subtypes (extended data fig 2d e).the proposed waves of neurogenesis by self-renewing pro- genitors and early neuroblasts that ubiquitously express ascl1 along the third ventricle (fig 1d) were shown in ascl1-creert2::ai14 mice at e18.5 with recombination induced during the e12.5–e16.5 period (fig 1e) and validated in ascl1−/− mice presenting a restricted cohort of sox2+ immature precursors (extended data fig 2f).tdtomato+ progenies in the many hypothalamic subregions confirmed neurogenesis dur- ing mid-gestation with a gradual decline after e16.5 (fig 1e extended data fig 2d).in support of postnatal neurogenesis sox2+ precursors persisted in the wall of the third ventricle and generated progenies that progressed through ascl1+ and rbfox3+ (neun) stages (fig 1f extended data fig 2g h).avp+ (cluster 26) and oxt+ (cluster 43) magnocellular and parvocellular neuroendo- crine clusters that are destined to the paraventricular nucleus (pvn; including trh+ and crh+ cells (cluster 24)) exhibited spatial convergence (fig 2a) and were separated by differentially expressed genes from their non-pvn counterparts.besides cataloguing pomc-specific tfs (fig 2a) we show that for example prdm12 and nhlh2 both placed by in situ hybridization into pomc–gfp+ neurons (fig 2b) are transiently expressed at early developmental stages followed by gradual decay of expression (pseudotime; fig 2b).we assigned 27 neuropeptides specifically to gaba gluta- mate and dopamine neuronal subtypes (fig 2c d and extended data fig 3b–e).our data demonstrate a transient increase in expression of for example sst tac1 bdnf adcyap1 pnoc nmu and trh in juvenile mice (p10)21 (fig 2c) along with the rapid induction of their cognate receptors during the early postnatal window (fig 2d).committed progeny then unidirectionally distanced them- selves laterally (extended data fig 2d–g) and expressed protogenes for neuronal migration (dlx1/2/5/6 rbfox3; fig 1d).second we investigated whether the dopamine phenotype evolves from the gaba lineage (fig 2d 4a d) a hypothesis that is consistent with data from adult mice429.reads were mapped to the cell ranger mm10-1.2.0 genome and counted with complimentary annotation (supplementary fig 2 3 supplementary note).last we applied the original rna velocity method13 with a few modifications: 1) we filtered out all non-degs which were present in <20 spliced/unspliced molecules and 2) to obtain a velocyto grid we exported the umap embeddings6773 of our high-quality cells from the previous step for visualization purposes (extended data fig 2b c).thus we plotted individual cell velocities embedded in umap space (fig 2a 3f extended data fig 7a).similarly we applied this method to the pomc cell group (fig 2b) and every distinct th containing group (fig 4b–d f h i extended data fig 9c supple- mentary fig 13 in supplementary note) guided by paga topology.for fig 2b (top right) to compute gene trends we sampled the trajectory for pomc neurons (n = 1643 cells from progenitors to mature pomc cells) to 500 bins.for fig 2b (bottom) rna scope in situ hybridization was performed on samples from pomc–gfp mice (n = 4 for prdm12 and n = 3 for nhlh2).for fig 2e experiment was performed in triplicate with n = 2 animals per time point.for extended data fig 2a we used the same dataset of n = 51199 ectodermal cells for each alignment algorithm.for extended data fig 2c n = 6314 cells from e 15.5 passed filters of original rna velocity analysis and are presented in the figure panels for each analysis of gene expression.for extended data fig 2d numbers of animals used for embryonal tracing are: n = 2 for e12.5 n = 3 for e13.5 n = 3 for e15.5 and n = 2 for e16.5.for extended data fig 2d freely available data from allen’s mouse developmental brain atlas were used.for extended data fig 2f images are representative of ascl+/− (n = 3) and ascl1−/− (n = 3) mice.for extended data fig 2g three animals were checked for each developmental stage.for extended data fig 2h two ascl1+ cells were traced in (bac)gad65–egfp:ascl1-creert2::ai14 animals for the time-point shown (tamoxifen injection at p14 sample collection at p21).article extended data fig 2 | see next page for caption.extended data fig 2 | molecular analysis of tfs involved in neurogenesis and neuronal differentiation.low-magnification image surveys are shown (see also fig 2e).]
Summary: Developmental trajectories of neuronal differentiation in the hypothalamus, including gene expression dynamics and cell fate transitions.

Text 267
10.1016/j.molcel.2020.04.008
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 3. a distinct trajectory for megakaryocyte differentiation is dramatically expanded in myelofibrosis (a–d) force-directed graphs (fdgs) for aggregate of all control + myelofibrosis cells (a), myelofibrosis only (b), control only (c), and control + down-sampled myelofibrosis dataset (d). in (d), the left graph shows lineage signature gene score and in the right graph cells are colored according to the donor type (healthy donors, blue; myelofibrosis, red). gene expression trajectories are visualized by superimposing the expression scores of lineage signature gene sets on fdg. grey cells represent uncommitted hspcs or cells with expression of more than 1 lineage signature. see also figures s2 and s3 and table s5.']. Reference sentences:[genes encoding key mediators of fibrosis (tgfb1 tnf and ltbp1 which encodes a protein that targets the latent form of transforming growth factor beta [tgf-b] and contributes to its activation; robertson et al. 2015) were most highly ex- pressed in mkp clusters 6–8 whereas mkp clusters 2 and 8 a b c d figure 3.]
Summary: Trajectory of megakaryocyte differentiation in myelofibrosis, visualized by gene expression patterns across cells.

Text 268
10.1016/j.molcel.2020.04.008
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 4. molecular regulators that may drive aberrant megakaryocyte differentiation in myelofibrosis (a) left: fdg generated using scanpy of all myelofibrosis cd34+ linà cells, showing unsupervised clusters based on louvain communitydetection method. right: pseudotime for the differentiation path from hscs superimposed on the fdg plot. (b) expression of selected transcription factor genes over pseudotime from hsc / hspc2 / megakaryocyte and hsc / hspc2 / ery differentiation paths. (c) expression of 6 genes that are differentially expressed between the erythroid and megakaryocyte trajectories over pseudotime.']. Reference sentences:[trajectory analysis of all myelofi- brosis hspcs performed using the scanpy toolkit (wolf et al. 2018) demonstrated a distinct trajectory for megakaryocyte dif- ferentiation through ‘‘pseudotime’’ from an hsc origin (hsc / hspc2 / mega; figure 4a).a b c figure 4.clusters were iden- tified using canonical lineage maker genes as hematopoietic stem cell (hsc) hematopoietic stem/progenitor cell (hspc1 hspc2 hspc3) erythroid (ery) megakaryocyte (mega) and myeloid (mye) (figure 4a) with hsc clearly positioned at the root of the trajec- tory.]
Summary: Trajectory analysis reveals distinct differentiation paths from hematopoietic stem cells to megakaryocytes and erythroid cells, with differential gene expression patterns along the paths.

Text 269
10.1016/j.devcel.2020.04.009
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 2. pseudotime analysis reveals genes differentially expressed across primary and neurogenic rpcs (a–c) umap embedding of the developmental trajectories of primary rpcs and mu€ller glia with cells colored by (a) pseudotime, (b) cell type, and (c)']. Reference sentences:[known inhibitors of the wnt pathway (sfrp1/2 and frzb) are expressed first in early rpcs and then again at later stages in m€uller glia (figure 2d).moreover c8orf46 (3110035e14rik; vexin) which is selectively expressed in early-stage neurogenic rpcs in mice (clark et al. 2019; moore et al. 2018) has higher expression in late stage compared with early-stage neurogenic rpcs in humans (figure 2l).to minimize the effect of regional differences in developmental timing (diaz-araya and provis 1992; van driel et al. 1990; la vail et al. 1991) we identified multiple genes that were differen- tially expressed between macular and peripheral rpcs within the gw20 datasets that showed low correlation with the rpc pseudotime performed in analyses associated with figure 2 (cor- relation close to 0; figure s4q).]
Summary: Trajectory analysis reveals differential gene expression patterns across developmental stages in RPCs and Müller glia.

Text 270
10.1038/s41467-020-16113-y
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 3 development of ohcs. a tsne plot for hcs isolated at p1. both ihcs and ohcs can be clustered into immature and more mature cell groups based on gene expression. arrow indicates trajectory of pseudotime (see c, d). b dot plot showing differentially expressed genes between ihcs and ohcs. ihcs exclusively express several genes, including fgf8, atp2a3, cabp2, tbx2, and shtn1. in contrast, a more limited number of genes are exclusively expressed in ohcs, including calca, serpina1c, veph1, cacng2, strip2, and msln1. this may reﬂect the delay in ohc maturation relative to ihc. c the p1 ohcs were analyzed using monocle to generate a pseudotime trajectory. analysis of gene expression profiles along pseudotime identified four different developmental phases. d feature plots for a representative gene or genes from each of the four ohc developmental phases. expression of tmc1 was limited to the most mature ihcs and ohcs (purple circles) e left-hand panel, tsne plot based on identification of transcriptional regulons using scenic. the hc and sc clusters are indicated by red (hc) and blue (sc) circles. right-hand panel, feature plots for representative hc-specific regulons (blue indicates high expression). lhx3, atoh1, pou4f3, and barhl1 are known hc-specific transcription factors (tfs). brf2 and usf2 have not been previously localized to hair cells but are present in hcs from previous bulk rnaseq experiments (see text). f left-hand panel, expanded regulon tsne for the hcs. right-hand panel, two additional tfs, bdp1 and arnt1 are localized to hc subsets. hc hair cells, iphc inner phalangeal cells/border cells, ipc inner pillar cells, opc outer pillar cells, dc1/2 deiters’ cells rows 1 and 2, dc3, deiters’ cells row 3, hec hensen’s cells, cc/osc claudius cells/outer sulcus cells, idc interdental cells, isc inner sulcus cells, ko kölliker’s organ cells, l.ko lateral kölliker’s organ cells, m.ko medial kölliker’s organ cells, oc90 oc90+ cells.']. Reference sentences:[when this data set was analyzed four cell clusters were identified (fig 3a).based on the gene expression (fig 3b) these cells were classified as 187 inner or 860 outer hcs (ihcs and ohcs) at two separate stages of development.con- sistent with their more rapid rate of maturation a greater number of unique genes were localized in ihcs (fig 3b).we identified four distinct patterns of gene expression labeled as ohc1–4 (fig 3c supplementary data 4).ohc1 included genes such as sox2 a marker of hc progenitors27 that were only expressed in cells at the beginning of the trajectory (fig 3d).in contrast ohc3 and ohc4 included genes such as atp2b2 a calcium atpase associated with hearing loss and expressed in stereocilia29 calb2 a calcium-binding protein that is known to be upregulated as hcs mature and tmc1 (fig 3d).results indicate a similar developmental pattern separating into four phases (supplementary fig 3 supplementary data 5).the resulting regulatory tsne identified cell type clusters that were similar to those generated in the transcriptional tsne (fig 3e and 1c supplementary data 6).however several additional tfs including brf2 and usf2 were also identified (fig 3e supplementary data 6) a result that is consistent with previous bulk rnaseq experiments demonstrating expression of both tfs in hcs (refs.to examine tfs that might be unique to ihcs or ohcs regulon analysis was examined within the hc clusters (fig 3f).1.0 0.5 0.0 –0.5 –1.0 b e oc90+ cc/osc isc l.ko3 idc l.ko2 l.ko1 m.ko dc1/2 dc3 hec opc ipc iphc ihc ohc iihc iohc hcs only bdp1 arnt f iihc iohc ohc ihc lhx3 atoh1 pou4f3 barhl1 brf2 usf2 auc > 0.27 auc > 0.41 auc > 0.46 auc > 0.35 auc > 0.46 auc > 0.45 auc > 0.29 auc > 0.16 pseudotime outer hair cells pseudotime relative expression low high 1 4 3 2 1 2 3 4 0123 –1 –2 –3 relative expression 0 20 –20 –40 a sox2 atoh1 atp2b2 calb2 insm1 tmc1 fig 3 development of ohcs.]
Summary: Trajectory analysis reveals four distinct developmental phases based on gene expression patterns in single cells.

Text 271
10.1073/pnas.1920433117
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 2. cell type-specific effects of tone rearing during the tonotopic critical period. (a) t-sne plots of cells from normally reared and tone reared mice at p15 and p20. (b) volcano plots depicting differentially expressed genes normally reared and tone reared conditions at p15 in excitatory neurons, inhibitory neurons, and oligodendrocytes. blue indicates statistically significant genes (fdr < 5%). (c) gene ontology (go) categories enriched in cell type-specific differentially expressed genes at p15 between normally reared and tone reared conditions. (d) boxplot of the trajectory of average gene expression for mbp from p10 to p20 under conditions of normal development and tone rearing from p12 to p15. box ranges represent the 25th and 75th percentiles, while the box whiskers indicate the 95% confidence interval. mean normalized gene expression is indicated. pairwise gene expression change significance is indicated by asterisks (fdr < 0.01, fdr < 0.001). (e) boxplot of the trajectory of average gene expression for mme and bcan from p10 to p20 under conditions of normal development and tone rearing from p12 to p15. box ranges represent the 25th and 75th percentiles, while the box whiskers indicate the 95% confidence interval. mean normalized gene expression is indicated. pairwise gene expression change significance is indicated by asterisks (fdr < 0.05, fdr < 0.001).']. Reference sentences:[unsupervised clustering analysis identified 19 clusters representing all major cell types (fig 2a).we identified hundreds of genes with altered expression (fdr < 5%) in the tone-reared condition in major cell types (fig 2b).within each we found examples of enriched ontologies for genes with expected cell type-specific functions (fig 2c).we found that the ex- pression of myelin-associated genes (e.g. mbp) was significantly and specifically decreased in tone-reared a1 oligodendrocytes at p15 (fig 2d).downloaded by guest on may 15 2020 their expression pattern in tone-reared animals (fig 2e).pnas latest articles | 3 of 9 neuroscience downloaded by guest on may 15 2020 a b c excitatory inhibitory oligodendrocytes excitatory inhibitory oligodendrocytes p15 p20 mme in oligodendrocytes mme in inhibitory cells bcan in inhibitory cells d e 4 16 64 p10 p15 p20 age normalized count value 2 4 8 16 p10 p15 p20 age normalized count value 8 32 128 512 p10 p15 p20 age normalized count value fig 2.we found that the expression of pnn-related genes including proteoglycans and proteases were dynamically regulated across a1 develop- ment and in response to tone exposure (fig 2e).]
Summary: Trajectory of gene expression changes in different cell types under normal development and tone rearing conditions.

Text 272
10.1073/pnas.1920433117
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 1. single nucleus sequencing of a1 across the tonotopic critical period. (a) schematic of experimental design and time points for tissue collection. (b) diagram of dissection approach used for auditory cortex tissue collection. (c) t-sne plot of cells collected at p10, p15, and p20 under normally reared condition. colors indicate different cell types. (d) volcano plots depicting differentially expressed genes between p10 and p20 under normally reared conditions in excitatory neurons, inhibitory neurons, and oligodendrocytes. blue indicates statistically significant genes (fdr < 5%). (e) gene ontology (go) categories enriched in cell type-specific differentially expressed genes across a1 development. (f) t-sne plots depicting c-fos and nr4a1 expression in p10, p15, and p20 normally reared cells. there is an enrichment of c-fos and nr4a1 positive cells at p20. (g) box plots of the trajectory of average gene expression for gad1, gad2, and pvalb in inhibitory cells from p10 to p20 under conditions of normal development and tone rearing from p12 to p15. box ranges represent the 25th and 75th percentiles, while the box whiskers indicate the 95% confidence interval. mean normalized gene expression is indicated. pairwise gene expression change significance is indicated by asterisks (fdr < 0.05, fdr < 0.001).']. Reference sentences:[we performed snrna-seq to generate a multicellular map of gene expression in a1 at p10 p15 and p20 (fig 1a).a1 tissue was freshly dissected and flash-frozen bilateral hemispheres were combined and nuclei were isolated (fig 1b and materials and methods) and then captured and their mrna was barcoded using the indrops platform (21).we used canonical marker genes to classify nuclei into eight main cell types: excitatory neurons (slc17a7+) inhibitory neurons (gad1+) oligodendro- cytes (olig1+) astrocytes (aqp4+) endothelial cells (cldn5+) and microglia (cx3cr1+) (fig 1c).in total we identified hundreds of genes that were dynamically regulated across the auditory tonotopic critical period in all major cortical cell types (fig 1d).we used gene ontology analysis to broadly classify functional modules of genes that are significantly regulated across this de- velopmental window (fig 1e).strikingly we found that there was a marked increase in immediate early genes in- cluding c-fos and nr4a1 in the p15/p20 clusters compared to p10 (fig 1f).we performed gene expression analysis within interneurons across early auditory development and found that expression of parvalbumin (pvalb) in interneurons dramatically increased from p10 to p20 (fig 1g).compared to controls astrocytes from tone-reared animals demonstrated significantly higher expression of immediate-early genes in- cluding fos junb and nr4a1 as well as up-regulation of the fig 1.our data showed that expression of gad1 and gad2 encoding the two gaba synthetic enzymes gad67 and gad65 re- spectively increased over development in a1 interneurons (fig 1g).]
Summary: Trajectory of gene expression changes in inhibitory cells from p10 to p20 during auditory cortex development.

Text 273
10.1038/s41586-020-2316-7
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 2 | developmental trajectory of ysmps in human embryonic liver. a, pca of ysmp, gmp, myeloblast and monocyte populations (n = 88 cells) sampled from livers at cs12–cs17 (n = 4 biologically independent embryo samples) suggests two distinct fates of ysmps. b, expression levels of the indicated genes projected onto pca. c, d, monocle prediction of ysmp developmental trajectory with pseudotime (c) and cluster information (d) mapped on. e, heat map showing scaled expression of branching curated genes of monocyte and neutrophil fates ordered by pseudotime.']. Reference sentences:[both ysmps and hae- matopoietic stem and progenitor cells (hspcs) expressed high levels of cd34 and myb but hspcs were seen only in the liver after cs17 and specifically expressed hox family transcription factors such as hoxa6 and hoxa10 (fig 1c d extended data fig 2 supplementary table 3).principal component analysis (pca) sug- gested that the ysmps which expressed cd34 and myb were located between the gmp and myeloblast populations (fig 2a b extended data fig 5a b).these cells gradually expressed neutrophilic genes such as ceacam8 while also increasing their expression of the monocyte mark- ers ccr2 and hla-dra (fig 2b) indicating that ysmps can differentiate along two distinct paths.trajectory analysis using monocle similarly revealed two distinct cell fates arising from ysmps (fig 2c d extended data fig 5c).comparing the degs between the two branches revealed that the cells shared a common signature including expression of myb mpo and ms4a3 while the monocyte branch exclusively expressed genes such as ccr2 and cd14 and the neutrophil branch began to express canonical neutrophil markers such as s100a9 and ceacam8 (fig 2e extended data fig 5d–g supplementary table 5).figure 1b c and supple- mentary table 2: 1231 haematopoietic cells (116 ysmp cells 72 erp cells 30 mkp cells 45 gmp cells 100 myeloblast cells 120 monocyte cells 69 mac_1 cells 196 mac_2 cells 57 mac_3 cells 79 mac_4 cells 33 hspcs 104 cd7hip cells 140 cd7lop cells 21 ilcs and 49 mast cells); fig 1d: 238 yolk sac haematopoietic cells and 354 liver haematopoietic cells; fig 2a–e and supplementary table 5: 88 liver haematopoietic cells; fig 3a: 782 myeloid cells (128 ysmp cells 37 gmp cells 103 myelo- blast cells 64 monocyte cells 7 liver_mac cells 51 blood_mac cells 71 lung_mac cells 46 skin_mac cells 61 ys_mac1 cells 29 ys_mac2 cells 73 head_mac1 cells 38 head_mac2 cells 41 head_mac3 cells and 33 head_mac4 cells); fig 3b c: 450 macrophages (7 liver_mac cells 51 blood_mac cells 71 lung_mac cells 46 skin_mac cells 61 ys_mac1 cells 29 ys_mac2 cells 73 head_mac1 cells 38 head_mac2 cells 41 head_mac3 cells and 33 head_mac4 cells); fig 3b: degs were detected using findallmarkers function in seurat (one-sided wilcoxon rank-sum test with p value adjusted for multiple testing using bonferroni correc- tion) genes with fold change >1.5 and adjusted p < 0.05 were selected and the top three degs for each cluster were used for visualization; fig 3d e: 514 myeloid cells with cs 20 and cs 23 cells excluded; fig 4a– d and supplementary table 7: 155 macrophages in head (9 head_mac0 cells 45 head_mac1 cells 29 head_mac2 cells 39 head_mac3 cells and 33 head_mac4 cells).extended data figure 1a–c: 1461 cells from n = 8 biologically independent embryo samples; extended data fig 1d–j: 1231 hae- matopoietic cells; extended data fig 1j; degs were detected using findallmarkers function in seurat (one-sided wilcoxon rank-sum test with p value adjusted for multiple testing using bonferroni correction) genes with fold change >1.5 and adjusted p < 0.05 were selected and the top five degs for each cluster were used for visualization; extended data fig 1k l: 188 progenitor cells (118 mouse emp cells and 70 human ysmp cells); extended data fig 2a d f and supplementary table 3: 640 progenitor cells (116 ysmp cells 72 erp cells 30 mkp cells 45 gmp cells 100 myeloblast cells 33 hspcs 104 cd7hip cells and 140 cd7lop cells); extended data fig 2b c: 116 ysmp cells and 33 hspc cells; extended data fig 2c f: degs were detected using findallmarkers function in seurat (one-sided wilcoxon rank-sum test with p value adjusted for multiple testing using bonferroni correction) genes with fold change >1.5 (1.25 for extended data fig 2c) and adjusted p < 0.05 were selected and the top ten degs (top five for extended data fig 2f) for each clus- ter were used for visualization; extended data fig 2e: 259 progenitor cells in liver and 131 progenitor cells in blood; extended data fig 3a: 11944 cells from 10x data; extended data fig 3b c: 238 yolk sac cells from strt–seq; extended data fig 3d e and sheet 1 of supplemen- tary table 4: 9565 yolk sac cells from 10x data; extended data fig 3f: 93 macrophages from strt–seq and 1259 macrophages from 10x; extended data fig 3g h: 9803 cells (6449 cells in cs11 yolk sac from 10x data 3116 cells in cs15 yolk sac from 10x data and 238 yolk sac cells from strt–seq); extended data fig 3h: degs were detected using findallmarkers function in seurat (one-sided wilcoxon rank-sum test with p value adjusted for multiple testing using bonferroni correction) surface marker genes with fold change >1.25 and adjusted p < 0.05 were selected and the top five degs for each cluster were used for visuali- zation; extended data fig 5a–d: 88 liver haematopoietic cells from 4 biologically independent embryo samples; extended data fig 5e–g: 66 liver haematopoietic cells; extended data fig 6a–d and supple- mentary table 6: 782 myeloid cells (128 ysmp cells 37 gmp cells 103 myeloblast cells 64 monocyte cells 7 liver_mac cells 51 blood_mac cells 71 lung_mac cells 46 skin_mac cells 61 ys_mac1 cells 29 ys_mac2 cells 73 head_mac1 cells 38 head_mac2 cells 41 head_mac3 cells and 33 head_mac4 cells); extended data fig 6c: degs were detected using findallmarkers function in seurat (one-sided wilcoxon rank-sum test with p value adjusted for multiple testing using bonferroni correction) genes with fold change >1.5 and adjusted p < 0.05 were selected and the top five degs for each cluster were used for visualization; extended data fig 6e: 450 macrophages (7 liver_mac cells 51 blood_mac cells 71 lung_mac cells 46 skin_mac cells 61 ys_mac1 cells 29 ys_mac2 cells 73 head_mac1 cells 38 head_mac2 cells 41 head_mac3 cells and 33 head_mac4 cells); extended data fig 7a: 64 monocytes; extended data fig 7b: 176 monocytes and macrophages in head; extended data fig 7c: 64 monocytes and macrophages in lung; extended data fig 7d–g and supplementary table 9: 41 macrophages in liver; extended data fig 7h: 49 macrophages in skin; extended data fig 8a–c e and supplementary table 8: 464 macrophages (20 adult head macrophages 39 embry- onic head macrophages 97 adult liver macrophages 9 embryonic liver macrophages 160 adult lung macrophages 59 embryonic lung macrophages 37 paediatric skin macrophages 43 embryonic skin article macrophages); extended data fig 8d: 464 macrophages (58 head macrophages 104 liver macrophages 156 lung macrophages 45 skin macrophages and 101 unspecified macrophages).extended data fig 2 | see next page for caption.article extended data fig 2 | characteristics of haematopoietic progenitors in human embryos.]
Developmental trajectory of cells in human embryonic liver, showing two distinct fates of cells transitioning along different paths.

Text 274
10.1093/nsr/nwaa099
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 5. glioma clonal evolution of patient gs13 at spatial and temporal resolution. (a) mri image of patient gs13. yellow and red markers in zoomed image represented peritumoral and tumoral sampling points. ring plot in the right and bottom displayed cell components of each point. color of the inner ring showed classified glial cell subtypes, and the outer ring showed detailed immune cell subtypes. cell numbers were labeled in the center of these ring plots. (b) single-cell cnv heatmap, cells were divided into 3 groups by hierarchical clustering. (c) clonal evolution trail followed by accumulating cnv events. each color represented a cnv subclone and chromosomes were labeled, in which copy number alterations happened during clonal transition. (d) cnv subclones components in each sampling point, p6 had a lower cn-3 ratio than p4/5. (e) cnv subclones distribution in t-sne coordinates. when cn-2 developed into cn-3, cells translocated from cluster 6 to cluster 12/10. (f) heatmap of differentially expressed genes between cn-2/5 glial cells. hierarchical clustering were applied in both gene and cell dimension. differential genes could be divide into 3 gene sets, marked with the left color bar. (g) functional enrichment of 3 gene-sets in (f). (h) single-cell trajectories of malignant cells in gs13. top left subplot was colored by global t-sne clusters, 2 branches of cells were developed from opc cells. the top right subplot was colored by cnv groups. the remaining 4 subplots were relative expression patterns of marker genes (olig2, hydin, mki67, dnali1 and tp73). (i) branched clonal developing model of gs13.']. Reference sentences:[from this patient we acquired 978 cells from 3 core and 2 peritumoral sites and found that the cells at core locations consisted of pn and cilium-positive cells (fig 5a).furthermore as cells transitioned to cn-3 the expression profile changed from global cluster 6 (pn) to global clusters 10 and 12 (cilium) (fig 5b-e).interestingly after cells transitioned to cn-3 they formed 2 branches with distinct gene expression profiles (fig 5f and h supplementary table 2).conversely the expression of genes in groups 2 and 3 (implicated in cell cycle/dna replication and cilium regulation respectively) increased (fig 5g and supplementary fig s12).(fig 5h and i) while branch 2 maintained the pn nature but showed high proliferative ability.]
Patterns of single-cell trajectories and clonal evolution in glioma cells, transitioning between different CNV subclones with distinct gene expression profiles.

Text 275
10.1093/nsr/nwaa099
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 6. characteristics of m2b macrophages and neutrophils and their potential in prognosis prediction using m2bneu score. (a) major chemokine and chemokine receptor’s relationship inside glioma tissue. (b) dot plots showed the m2bneu score distribution in the optimized global t-sne map. these scores were calculated by m2bneu genes listed in supplementary fig 14c. (c) biopsy type distribution of tumor associated microglia and macrophage cells. (d) trajectory analysis of macrophage/microglia evolution on tam cells from all patients, colored by (d) pseudotime, (e) optimized global t-sne clusters, (f) biopsy types, and (g-n) marker genes expressed in the pseudotime trajectory map.']. Reference sentences:[since our single-cell platform exhibit high sensitivity with higher number of average detectable genes expressed in single cells compared to other glioma datasets (4470 genes/cell versus < 2000 genes/cell) we sought to build a ligand/receptor interaction map for the reconstruction of the most important chemoattractant relationships that exist between glioma tumor cells and tam in the glioma tme (fig 6a and supplementary fig s15).based on their common gene expression signals we calculated an enrichment score from 38 genes (fig 6b and supplementary fig s16c) and used this signature to deconvolute the presence of these cells from gene expression profiles of bulk tissues and predict clinical outcome.finally a lineage trajectory was built with tam cells (fig 6d-f) showing the gradual change of three transitional states.these findings suggest a model whereby tam cell polarization in glioma is the result of two independent cell sources resident microglial cells and bmdm cells (fig 6g-n).]
Summary: Trajectory analysis of cell evolution in glioma tissue based on gene expression, revealing transitional states and cell sources.

Text 276
10.1016/j.devcel.2020.05.010
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 4. three-species comparison of gene expression dynamics across the germ cell differentiation trajectory (a) pseudotime heterochrony between pairs of species, shown as correlation matrices between 200 ordered centroids in each species, defined from initial pseudotime assignments in each species. sc, spermatocyte. elong, elongating spermatid.']. Reference sentences:[however when 200 biological steps are defined separately for each species heterochrony is observed (figure 4a) i.e. pseudotime proceeds at different rates (star methods).as expected the 20 centroids show synchrony after reassigning cells to the universal time indicating proper align- ment (figure 4c).with analogous states properly matched we compared cell occupancy across the germ cell differentiation states: gc1–20 (mouse and human) or gc1–21 (macaque) along with the spg states: spg1–6 (star methods; figure 4d).using conserved markers (figure 4e) we mapped these states to major spermato- genesis processes: mitosis (spg1–6) meiosis (gc1–4) and spermiogenesis (gc5–14 round spermatids and gc15–20/21 elongating spermatids).humans and macaques have a large pool of undifferentiated spg (spg1–2; figure 4c) that undergo a limited number of transit-amplifying divisions whereas mice have fewer such cells which undergo more mitotic divisions (see spg section).we performed pca for the merged centroids datasets (201x3=603 centroids) using 247 genes which is the intersection of the 2000 highly variable genes for each species initially selected by monocle(figure 4b).however heterochrony occurs between species as deviations from the diagonal are observed(figure 4a) suggesting that the biological steps defined separately for each species - using the current stan- dard method - proceed at different rates even when the comparison is based on the same set of 247 genes.]
Patterns of gene expression dynamics across the differentiation trajectory, showing heterochrony between species.

Text 277
10.1016/j.immuni.2020.05.010
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 5. transcriptional changes along the single-cell differentiation trajectory during the initial stages of human thymopoiesis (a) analysis schema. (b) pseudotime trajectory. 1–11: p1–11 clusters from figure 1b. (c) modules of genes whose expression varied with pseudotime (thymus 1 shown; 99% overlap seen with thymus 2 and 3 modules; genes in table s4). (d–g) cells along the shortest path between the root node in p1 and the circled (red) node in p11 were used to model pseudotime expression profiles. pseudotime distributions of cells (d, circles: metastable states), clusters (e), cycling status (f), and maximal rates of change in gene expression (g) along the shortest path. (e) includes data for the cell cycling gene pcna. (h) expression profiles of a subset of hematopoietic stem and progenitor (hspc) genes and lineage genes.']. Reference sentences:[of note p2 originated from the earliest p1 cells suggesting an early divergence of at least some pdc- primed progenitors from the main t cell pathway (figure 5b).genes that varied with pseudotime were clustered into five modules (figure 5c; table s4).these profiles finely distinguished tran- scriptional changes along the differentiation trajectory; e.g. genes repressed earlier (e.g. meis1) versus later (e.g. dtx1) (figure 5h).overall srna-seq data from cd34– cells recapitulated known regulators and uncovered candidate a c b d e h g f figure 5.cells along the shortest path between the root node in p1 and a manually selected node in p11 (node shown in figure 5) were ex- tracted and used for smoothing expression values over pseudotime in the case of cd34+ cells.]
Summary: Gene expression changes along a differentiation trajectory, with distinct modules and cell states identified.

Text 278
10.1016/j.immuni.2020.05.010
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 7. the earliest human thymic progenitors are transcriptionally distinct from murine thymic progenitors (a) cell clusters (1–12: pm1–12) in single-cell rna sequencing (srna-seq) data from murine thymic progenitors. (b) expression of a subset of hspc (hematopoietic stem and progenitor cell) and lineage genes in clusters. percentage of cells with detectable expression (% expression) and z-scored mean expression shown. (c) overlay of murine data onto human cd34+ thymic cells (combined data from thymuses 1–5, figure 1b). the human p1 cluster segregated into 1a and 1b. 1a and 1b are shown on the human pseudotime trajectory (bottom right). (d and e) transcription factor (tf) genes with divergent (d) and hspc and lineage genes with conserved (e) profiles between human and murine progenitors. a public dataset containing murine fetal thymic progenitors was used. see also figure s7.']. Reference sentences:[seurat clustering revealed 12 clusters (pm1-12) (figure 7a).murine uncommitted and committed cells tended to overlap or be in closer proximity to human uncommitted and committed clusters respectively (figure 7c).thus while human and murine progenitors show many tran- scriptomic similarities the earliest human and murine progenitor cells have distinct transcriptomes (figure 7c).furthermore transcriptional ev- idence of pdc specification in unperturbed primary human thymic progenitor cells has been lacking in part because the a b d c e figure 7.we then merged data from the human cd34+ merged dataset (from figure 1b thymuses 1-5) and the murine dn1-3a dataset (from figure 7a) into a single com- bined human-murine dataset (merged hm dataset) using the mergeseurat function.ll resource e6 immunity 52 1105–1118.e1–e9 june 16 2020 human and murine cells were then labeled by their cluster identity from the prior separate clustering analyses of the merged cd34+ dataset (p1-11 from figure 1b) and the murine dataset (p1-12 m from figure 7a) and visualized separately in hm tsne space in order to enable mapping between murine to human cell types.imagej (v 1.50a) was used to overlay human cells onto mouse cells in a single tsne plot (figure 7c).a single combined tradeseq analysis with k (number of knots) = 6 and the thymus of origin as a covariate was done for cd34+ or cd34– cells (one combined analysis for cd34+ cells and a separate combined analysis for cd34– cells) on the genes depicted in fig- ure 5 and figure 7 (cd34+ cells) and hvg.]
Summary: Trajectory analysis reveals distinct transcriptional profiles between human and murine thymic progenitors, with conserved and divergent gene expression patterns.

Text 279
10.1016/j.celrep.2020.107805
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 2. dissection of neuronal lineage progression and intermediate states (a) force-directed neuronal lineage trajectories comprising v-svz astrocytes, anscs, tacs, v-svz nbs, ob nbs, and neurons in both nesflpo and gcert2. each cell type and/or sample is colored separately. (b) cell scores for six schpf factors are projected on force-directed lineage trajectories. two high-scoring genes are highlighted for each factor. genes marking the transition states are in red. (c) binomial enrichment of genes in astrocyte and ansc clusters compared with the remaining neuronal lineage. (d) log2 (cpm+1) expression values of cldn10, notum, ascl1, and mcm2 in all gcert2 (7,903 cells), nesflpo (12,334 cells), and tdtom+ (349 cells) neuronal lineage cells isolated from gcert2 and nesflpo. cells without marker detection are in gray. (e) representative enriched and depleted pathways (fdr < 0.01) in notum+ neuronal lineage cells (nes, normalized enrichment score). (f) phenotypic volume analysis of neuronal lineage clusters (mean ± standard error of the mean). (g) average expression of the top five most specific ob neuron subtype markers (fdr < 0.01) (table s1) in cell clusters.']. Reference sentences:[the resulting trajectories revealed that v-svz and ob nbs co-cluster and lineage progression is constricted by two developmental transitions (figure 2a; table s2).using schpf we identified signatures of two intermediate populations corre- sponding to factors 2 and 5 in addition to known gene expres- sion programs (figure 2b; figure s2a; table s2).factor 2 was also enriched for ascl1 and sfrp1 that encodes another secreted wnt inhibitor distinctly separated from factor 1 and enriched for astrocyte genes such as gfap slc1a3 and cldn10 (figure 2b).notum expression preceded ascl1 expression enriched by factor 2 in the neuronal lineage suggesting additional heteroge- neity (figure 2d).the g1/s transition gene set was significantly upregulated sug- gesting an advanced cell-cycle state in notum+ nscs (figure 2e).astrocytes formed the most heterogeneous cluster cell reports 31 107805 june 23 2020 3 report ll open access (figure 2f) partly because of the inclusion of qnscs and niche astrocytes in this cluster whereas ansc and tacs were more uniform.we observed an increase in cellular het- erogeneity in nbs and ob neurons (figure 2f).the expression of neuron2 and neuron3 markers was particularly enriched in ob nbs compared with nscs and tacs (figure 2g) suggesting an activation of a terminal differentiation program at the nb stage whereas we did not detect traces of neuron9 markers in nbs as expected or neuron7 markers located in anterior olfactory nucleus (fig- ure 1c).nb expansion upon notum inhibition is likely partly due to the increase in the number of intermediate progenitors because they are upstream of nbs in the v-svz hierarchy (re- viewed in chaker et al. 2016; ponti et al. 2013) (figure 2; fig- ure s3g).phenotypic volume in figure 2f was computed as previously described (azizi et al. 2018).]
Patterns of lineage progression and intermediate states in neuronal cells, including transitions and enriched gene expressions, are shown in the trajectory analysis.

Text 280
10.1186/s13073-020-00756-z
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 2 integrated single-cell targeted multi-omics approach identifies a trajectory of human cd4+ regulatory t cell (treg) activation. a umap plot depicting the expression of the canonical treg transcription factor foxp3 in the identified resting cd4+ t cell clusters. naive and memory treg clusters are annotated as shown in fig 1c. b heatmap displaying the top 10 differentially expressed genes within the three identified resting treg clusters, depicted in fig 1d. c umap plot depicting the overlaid expression of the cd4+ t cell transcription factors bach2 (black to green) and prdm1 (encoding blimp-1; black to red). d illustrative examples of the expression of highly differentially expressed genes within the cluster of activated tregs (cluster 3), including hla-dra and dusp4 at the mrna level and cd39, ccr4, cd80 and cd86 at the protein level']. Reference sentences:[genome medicine (2020) 12:55 page 8 of 22 population marked by the expression of the transcrip- tion factor foxp3 and other classical treg signature genes including helios (encoded by ikzf2) il-2ra ctla-4 or tigit (fig 2a b).these two key transcription fac- tors displayed a distinct mutually exclusive expression pattern with high expression of bach2 mrna in naive cells declining gradually—with a concomitant gradual increase in prdm1 expression—along the naive- memory differentiation axis (fig 2c).genome medicine (2020) 12:55 page 9 of 22 markers such as hla-dra dusp4 and cd39 (fig 2d) and revealed a trajectory of treg activation in resting primary cd4+ t cells.protein expression of cd80 and cd86 marks a subset of recently activated cd4+ tregs in circulation a feature of the most activated mtreg cluster (cluster 3) was the marked increased expression of the b7 proteins cd80 (b7.1) and cd86 (b7.2; fig 2b d) two t cell co- stimulatory molecules usually expressed in antigen- presenting cells (apcs).further- more we also note a distinct co-expression of cd80 protein and hla class ii mrna (hla-dra) in a subset of activated th1 cells (fig 2d) which could indicate re- cent activation in the context of strong tcr signalling required to induce the differentiation of th1 cells [43 44].]
Summary: Trajectory of treg activation in cd4+ cells shown by expression patterns of transcription factors and genes, including markers of activation like cd80 and cd86.

Text 281
10.1186/s13073-020-00756-z
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 3 pseudotime analysis reveals distinct trajectories of cd4+ t cell differentiation in vivo. a umap plots depicting the inferred diffusion pseudotime of each single cell in the identified t cell clusters. b graph reconstructing the developmental trajectories between the identified t cell clusters. edge weights represent confidence in the presence of connections between clusters. the analysis was performed in the combined transcriptional and proteomics data using the partition-based graph abstraction (paga) method. c–e reconstructed paga paths for the differentiation of the identified th1 (c), th17 (d) and treg (e) lineages. expression of the lineage-specific transcription factors and selected differentially expressed genes is depicted for each trajectory. f schematic representation of the identified lineage differentiation trajectories using the single-cell trajectories reconstruction (stream) method. colour code corresponds to the cluster assignment depicted in a. g expression of the memory-associated cd45ro isoform and the lineage-specific transcription factors tbx21 (encoding tbet), rorc (encoding rorγt) and foxp3 is depicted along the identified developmental branches']. Reference sentences:[arrows recapitulate the identified axis of th1 and th17 differentiation and are supported both on the gradient of expression of the respective lineage-restricted transcription factors (tbet and rorγt respectively) and on the developmental trajectories identified by the pseudotime analysis depicted in fig 3. g expression of the effector-type cytokine transcripts ifng nkg7 prf1 ccl5 gzmh and gzmk in resting cd4+ t cells trzupek et al.consistent with our previous findings the pseudotime analysis revealed a gradient of t cell differentiation along the naive-memory differenti- ation axis which lead to the identification of three dis- tinct differentiation pathways associated with the acquisition of a th1 th17 or treg phenotype (fig 3a b).these identified differentiation trajectories were associated with gradually increased expression of the lineage-specific transcription factors tbet rorγt and foxp3 respectively which regulate the transcriptional programme associated with the respective t cell lineages (fig 3c–e).more- over the pseudotime analysis also recapitulated the treg differentiation trajectory from naive tregs (clus- ter 0) to activated memory tregs (cluster 3) which was regulated by the mutually exclusive expression of the bach2 and blimp-1 transcription factors (fig 3e).genome medicine (2020) 12:55 page 10 of 22 (stream) [16] another method that has been devel- oped to visualise developmental trajectories using multi- omics data (fig 3f).further supporting a putative com- mon developmental pathway of treg and th17 cells stream analysis identified foxp3+ memory tregs (mtregs) as a less differentiated t cell state which shares a developmental trajectory with differentiated rorγt+ th17 cells with cluster 8 representing an inter- mediate transitional cell state in this trajectory (fig 3g).these findings were recapitulated on the pseudotime analysis which identified cd80/cd86 protein expression as markers of the temporal treg differ- entiation trajectory (fig 3e).furthermore the pseudotime analysis demon- strated that these cells correspond to a highly differenti- ated cell state located within the treg and th17 differentiation trajectories (fig 3a).in particular the pseudotime analysis per- formed in our dataset identified cd80 as a marker of the temporal differentiation of th17 cells (fig 3d) which may provide a mechanistic rationale for the re- cently reported suppression of th17 differentiation in response to anti-cd80 treatment in mice [42].]
Summary: Differentiation trajectories of T cell lineages are depicted based on pseudotime analysis, showing gradual expression changes of lineage-specific transcription factors and genes.

Text 282
10.1038/s41587-020-0602-4
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 3 | inferred differentiation pathways for epithelial cells from the upper respiratory tract. a, umap displaying the subset of airway epithelial cells of all patients infected with sars-cov-2 used in this study (see methods). b, pseudo-time trajectory projected onto a umap of selected epithelial cells. pseudo-time values are color coded. the red dot indicates the start point of the trajectory. numbers in circles indicate three inferred differentiation paths c, dot plot depicting the markers of the epithelial cell types. expression levels are color coded; the percentage of cells expressing the respective gene is size coded. d, cell density of airway epithelial cell clusters along inferred cellular trajectory reflecting epithelial cell differentiation. cells are ordered by pseudo-time (cell-to-cell distance metric) as computed by reversed graph embedding approach of monocle3 (left). expression of specific genes along the cell trajectory important for the corresponding differentiation paths (right). the dots indicate the gene expression of individual cells colored by the epithelial cell type. the green lines approximate expression along the inferred trajectory by polynomial regression fits.']. Reference sentences:[we inferred the differentiation pathways of basal cells from our scrna-seq data by pseudo-time mapping using reversed graph embedding (fig 3)22.the prototypical differentiation of basal cells through secretory cells to terminally differentiated ciliated cells is mediated by foxn4+ cells (path 1 in fig 3abd).we detected multiple genes involved in this trajectory such as cytokeratins (krt4 and krt7)26 and intraflagellar component genes (ift43)25 (path 2 in fig 3a–d).finally our analysis predicted a new alternative differentiation pathway (path 3 in fig 3b) leading from immature secretory cells directly into ciliated cells mediated by ifng-responsive cells sug- gesting that this direct differentiation pathway is dependent on the interferon response and marked by interferon-stimulated genes (isgs) such as isg15 ifit1 and cxcl10 (fig 3d)27.that stat1 a central transcription factor of the interferon response40 was among the top predictors for ace2 expression (extended data fig 3a) confirming ace2 as an interferon-inducible gene in human airway epithelium.the preferential expression of ifng by ctls and of genes encoding its receptors ifngr1 and ifngr2 by secretory and ciliated cells supports the notion that ace2 is upregulated in epithelial cells at least partially through ifng signaling by immune cells (extended data fig 3b).basal secretory and ciliated cells were present in different cell states from differentiating to terminally differentiated as shown by their intermediate expression levels of their respective cell type markers (extended data fig 2) inferred mitotic stages (extended data fig 9) and pseudo-time analysis (fig 3).this cell type was defined by the low but mixed marker expression of basal and ciliated cells and by pseudo-time information (fig 3a–d).b table indicating p-values and log fold changes of markers of the extrinsic apoptotic cascade (fas casp8) in epithelial cell populations (for other apoptotic markers see fig 3e).data exclusions we excluded data points with less than 20 secretory or ciliated cells in fig 3a as the percentage of ace2 expression could not robustly be identified in these samples.]
Patterns of differentiation pathways from basal cells to ciliated cells mediated by specific genes and cell types along a trajectory.

Text 283
10.1126/sciadv.aba1972
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 5. trajectory analysis of krt5−/krt17+ cells. (a and b) slingshot-based pseudo-time trajectories calculated from umap embedding of (a) 6406 at2, transitional at2, at1, and krt5−/krt17+ cells and (b) 4611 scgb3a2+, transitional at2, at1, and krt5−/krt17+ cells. both (a) and (b) are composed entirely of cells from pf samples. each slingshot trajectory has a single start and a single end point, either at1 or krt5−/krt17+. the trajectories were then plotted together, leading to not only the appearance of a branching trajectory but also results in a crossing of trajectories. (c) rna-ish demonstrating krt17+ cells adjacent to sftpc+ and scgb3a2+ cells with low-level coexpression of multiple lineage markers in fibrotic regions of pf lung. (d and e) heatmap depicting relative expression (normalized and scaled z-scored) of the top 400 genes with significant variation across pseudo-time trajectories (generalized additive model; fdr,<0.01) from (d) at2 or (e) scgb3a2+ to krt5−/krt17+ cells. modules of expression were manually annotated to show stable expression (i), progression toward transitional at2 (ii), progression toward krt5−/krt17+ (iii), and stable krt5−/krt17+ (iv). (f) normalized expression levels of transcription factors with binding sites enriched for pseudo-time–associated genes and two representative target genes in each cell type split by control and pf and smoothed across the pseudo-time trajectories. cells from control samples representing the at2 to at1 trajectory are shown (fig s16) as a comparison. the gray shading represents the 99% ci. (g) a correlation of sox9 and sox4 with a putative target gene and known pf biomarker cdkn1a. each dot represents the average expression of the two genes within an individual. only individuals with detectable expression of both genes were included. the p values were calculated using a linear regression. (h) rna-ish demonstrating colocalization of sox9 and krt17 in a pf lung.']. Reference sentences:[at2 krt5−/krt17+ scgb3a2+ at1 ii iii iv c e f –5 0 5 –4 –2 0 2 4 umap_1 umap_2 –6 –4 –2 0 2 4 6 –4 –2 0 2 4 umap_1 a b 50 µm krt17 sox9 pf control h 0.0016 sox4 sox9 cdkn1a 0.0393 0.5 0.5 g 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 1.0 1.5 0.00.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 2.5 2.5 0 2 0 fig 5.2020; 6 : eaba1972 8 july 2020 scie n c e a d v a nces | resea r ch a rt icl e 8 of 15 scgb3a2+ cells (fig 5 a and b).consistent with this hypothesis rna-ish demonstrated krt17+ cells localizing near scgb3a2+ and sftpc+ cells in pf lungs (fig 5c) but not controls (fig s15).to better understand the transcriptional program driving krt5−/krt17+ cells we identified genes signifi- cantly associated with our slingshot-based trajectory starting from both at2 and scgb3a2+ cells (see materials and methods fig 5 d to f and table s8).both sox4 and sox9 are also associated with the trajectory (fig 5f) and are known to be key regulators of epithelial cells in the lung (42–44).furthermore we observed an increase in sox4 expression in transitional at2 cells high expression of sox4 in scgb3a2+ cells and high expression of sox9 in krt5−/krt17+ cells (fig 5f).we also observed a significant up-regulation of nr1d1 in at2 and transitional at2 cells from control lungs while it was near undetectable in pf samples (fig 5f and table s5).to this end we calcu- lated a pseudo-time trajectory from at2 cells to at1 cells using only cells from control lungs (fig 5f and fig s16).we also directly examined the relationship between expression of sox4 and sox9 and putative target genes in cells where both genes were expressed in at2 tran- sitional at2 or krt5−/krt17+ cells (see materials and methods fig 5g and fig s17).we identified significant associations between sox4 and sox9 and a number of genes with known function in pf including the known senescence marker cyclin dependent kinase inhibitor 1a (cdkn1a) (fig 5g and fig s17) (45).last we used rna-ish to demonstrate colocalization of krt17 and sox9 in the tissue from patients with pf (fig 5h).tfbs analysis for motif analysis findmotifs.pl (package homer v4.10) (65) was used on promoter sequences [700–base pair (bp) upstream and 100-bp downstream of transcription start-site (tss)] of genes in the trajectory heatmap (fig 5 d and e and table s9) using homer pre_built human promoter database and default parameters.the strength of the correlation was assessed across all in- dividuals with detectable expression of both genes using a linear regression and those with a nominal p value of less than 0.05 were plotted color-coded by pf and control (fig 5g and fig s17).]
Summary: Trajectory analysis reveals gene expression changes from initial to final cell states, with key transcription factors and target genes associated with pulmonary fibrosis.

Text 284
10.1126/sciadv.aba1972
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 3. trajectory analysis of transitional at2 cells. (a) slingshot-based pseudo-time trajectories calculated from umap embedding of 14,462 at2, scgb3a2+, transitional at2, and at1 cells from pf and control lungs starting from either at2 (orange) or scgb3a2+ (purple). the trajectories are calculated independently for each lineage, and the robustness of these lineages is demonstrated in fig s9. (b) smoothed expression of lineage markers along pseudo-time trajectories from scgb3a2+ or at2. the gray shading indicates 99% ci. (c) rna-ish demonstrating ager+/sftpc+ cells in control lungs (d) and ager+/sftpc+/scgb3a2+ in pf lungs. green arrowheads denote colocalized signals. (e and f) quantification of rna-ish from control (n=4) and pf (n=5) reporting (e) coexpression of scgb1a1 and ager as a proportion of all sftpc+ cells and (f) coexpression of sftpc and ager as a proportion of all scgb3a2+ cells. data are presented as means ± 95% ci and distributions compared by two-way anova.']. Reference sentences:[a pseudo-time analysis—used to identify trajectories between cell types/states—performed using the slingshot (36 37) package in r suggested that this transitional at2 cell population represents a state during the differentiation trajectory from at2 to at1 with increasing at1 markers along the trajectory (see materials and methods and fig 3 a and b).unexpectedly among both control and pf lungs a proportion of transitional at2 cells express scgb3a2 (fig 2a and fig s8) and trajectory analyses demonstrated scgb3a2+ cells up-regulating at1 and at2 programs (fig 3 a and b) leading us to hypothesize that scgb3a2+ cells are capable of generating at1 cells by differentiating to transitional at2 cells.last to confirm these states exist in vivo we performed rna-ish using tissue sections from sequenced lungs to localize scgb3a2 sftpc (at2 marker) and ager (at1 marker) and identified a putatively tran- sitional state coexpressing sftpc and ager in both control (fig 3c) and fibrotic lungs (fig 3d).consistent with transcriptomic data a subset of these sftpc+/ager+ dual-positive cells expressed low levels of scgb3a2 in pf samples and were rarely observed in control lungs (fig 3 c to f).2020; 6 : eaba1972 8 july 2020 scie n c e a d v a nces | resea r ch a rt icl e 4 of 15 and ager demonstrated a larger proportion of sftpc+ cells as a proportion of all scgb3a2+ cells and increased scgb3a2+ cells as a proportion of sftpc+ cells (fig 3 e and f).at2at1 at2 fig 3.for clarity and brevity multiple trajectories were plotted on the same graph (fig 3a and 5 a and b).]
Summary: Transitional cell trajectory from at2 to at1 with scgb3a2+ cells capable of generating at1 cells, confirmed by RNA-ISH.

Text 285
10.1126/sciimmunol.abd1554
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 6. validation of the combined ifn-i and inflammatory responses in the transcriptome of post-mortem lung tissues from lethal covid-19. (a) ucsc genome browser snapshots of representative genes. (b) bar plot showing the average –log10(p-value) values from the enrichment analysis using the perturbed genes of four different cell lines in l1000 lincs for up-regulated genes (n= 386) in post-mortem lung tissues compared to biopsied healthy lung tissue. error bars indicate standard deviation. (c) gsea of significantly up- and downregulated genes in post-mortem lung tissues for gene sets originated from up-regulated genes in c2 (n=96), c3 (n=143), c4 (n=218), and c5 (n=30) of fig 4b. (d and e) gsea of significantly up- and down-regulated genes in post-mortem lung tissues for gene sets originated from the top 200 up-regulated genes in cluster 3 (left) and cluster 1 (right) from the trajectory analysis in fig 5c (d), and from gene sets originated from the top 200 upregulated genes in classical monocytes of mild (left) and severe (right) covid-19 (e).']. Reference sentences:[alt- hough the analysis was limited to only two patients without individual cell-type resolution in genome browser up-regu- lation of ifitm1 isg15 and jak3 and down-regulation of rps18 were observed commonly in post-mortem covid-19 lung tissues and classical monocytes of severe covid-19 (fig 6a).in the analysis with cytokine-responsive gene sets both the ifn-i response and tnf/il-1β-inflammatory response were prominent in the lung tissues (fig 6b).these genes were also significantly associated with the cluster 1 identified in the trajectory anal- ysis but not with cluster 3 (fig 6d).when gene sets were defined by degs between mild and severe covid-19 the degs in post-mortem lung tissues were significantly associ- ated with genes up-regulated specifically in severe covid-19 (fig 6e).in- deed severe covid-19-specific signatures discovered in our current study were significantly enriched in the publically available data of post mortem lung tissues from the blanco- melo et al.’s study although the analysis was limited to only two patients without individual cell-type resolution (fig 6).gsea 4.0.3 software was used to conduct the gsea when a ranked list of genes was available (fig 5g fig 6c-e) (37).]
Patterns related to trajectory analysis in single-cell transcriptomics, showing gene expression changes in different cell states or disease severity.

Text 286
10.1126/sciimmunol.abd1554
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 5. trajectory analysis of classical monocytes. (a) volcano plot showing degs between mild and severe covid-19 groups. each dot indicates individual gene, colored by red when a gene is significant deg. (b) bar plot showing the average – log10(p-value) values in enrichment analysis using the perturbed genes of four different cell lines listed in l1000 lincs for upregulated genes in the severe covid-19 group. error bars indicate standard deviation. (c) trajectory analysis of classical monocytes from specimens obtained at two different time points in a single covid-19 patient (mild: c7-2, 1,197 cells; severe: c7-1, 631 cells). the color indicates cluster information (left) or the severity of covid-19 (right). (d) relative expression patterns of representative genes in the trajectory analysis are plotted along the pseudotime. the color indicates the relative gene expression calculated by monocle 2. (e) bar plots showing the average – log10(p-value) values in the enrichment analysis using the perturbed genes of four different cell lines in l1000 lincs for up-']. Reference sentences:[when we analyzed degs severe covid-19 was characterized by up-regulation of various isgs including isg15 ifitm1/2/3 and isg20 (fig 5a).both tnf/il-1β-responsive genes and ifn-i-responsive genes were enriched in severe covid-19-specific up-regulated genes (fig 5b).trajec- tory analysis aligned classical monocytes along the disease severity with cluster 1 and cluster 3 corresponding to later and earlier pseudotime respectively (fig 5c).representative genes in cluster 1 was enriched in the severe stage and highly associated with the both ifn-i and tnf/il-1β-associated in- flammatory response (fig 5d fig s5b and table s11).gsea confirmed that both the ifn-i response and tnf/il-1β in- flammatory response were prominent in cluster 1 but not in cluster 3 (fig 5e).cluster 1 exhibited a significantly higher association with a gene set from systemic lupus erythemato- sus which is a representative inflammatory disease with ifn- i features than cluster 3 (fig 5f left) but was not signifi- cantly associated with a gene set from rheumatoid arthritis (fig 5f right).this gene module was significantly enriched in cluster 1 but not in cluster 3 (fig 5g) which suggests that the ifn-i response may exacerbate hyper-inflammation by abolishing a negative feedback mechanism.gsea 4.0.3 software was used to conduct the gsea when a ranked list of genes was available (fig 5g fig 6c-e) (37).(d and e) gsea of significantly up- and down-regulated genes in post-mortem lung tissues for gene sets originated from the top 200 up-regulated genes in cluster 3 (left) and cluster 1 (right) from the trajectory analysis in fig 5c (d) and from gene sets originated from the top 200 up- regulated genes in classical monocytes of mild (left) and severe (right) covid-19 (e).]
Summary: Trajectory analysis reveals gene expression patterns aligning with disease severity, with cluster 1 showing upregulation of inflammatory response genes in severe COVID-19.

Text 287
10.1038/s41467-020-17358-3
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 6 transcriptional convergence of mhc-ii+;club and at2 cells onto the alveolar krt8+adi cell state. a velocity plot displays the umap embedding colored by louvain clusters with velocity information overlaid (arrows). b velocity plot of a subset of the data only showing alveolar identities and club cell subsets. rna velocity shows contribution of scgb1a1+ club cells to both krt8+ adi and at2 identities. c diffusion map of louvain clusters 2, 10, and 9 colored by inferred terminal state likelihood reveals two distinct transdifferentiation trajectories from activated at2 and mhc-ii + club cells towards a krt8+ cell state. d diffusion map colored by groupings derived from gaussian mixed model clustering. red and blue colors represent at2 and mhc-ii + club cell differentiation bridges towards the krt8+ adis. grey colors represent cells at endpoints. e the lines indicate smoothed relative frequencies across time points of cells within the at2 (red) and mhc-ii + club cell (blue) differentiation bridges. f the lines illustrate smoothed expression levels of scgb1a1, krt8, and sftpc across the trajectory, marking cell identities. the dashed vertical line indicates the peak of krt8 expression. g the heatmap shows the gene']. Reference sentences:[alveolar krt8 expression was increased in a model of neonatal hypoxia and hyperoxia with inﬂuenza type-a infection26 (supplementary fig 6a) as well as exposure of adult mice to hyperoxia which has been shown to preferentially kill alveolar at1 cells27 (supplementary fig 6b).rna velocity vectors overlaid onto the umap embedding predicted transdifferentiation of club cells towards ciliated and goblet cells which is in agreement with previous literature2 (fig 6a).interestingly rna velocities also strongly suggested a dual origin of alveolar krt8+ adi cells from at2 and airway cells in particular from scgb1a1+ club cells (fig 6a b).club cells and mhc-ii+club cells show differentiation bridges towards at2 cells and krt8+ adi (fig 6b).restricting the analysis to cells “bridging” from the at2 and mhc-ii + club cells to krt8+ adi (fig 6d) we found that the at2 conversion preceded the mhc-ii + club to krt8+ adi differentiation by about one week (fig 6e).we observed a gradual decline in expression of the homeobox protein nkx-2.1 critical for lung development and lung epithelial identity31 as well as foxp2 which is one of the key transcriptional repressors involved in the specification and differentiation of the lung epithelium3233 in both mhc-ii + club and at2 cells during conversion to krt8+ adi (fig 6h).at2 cell conversion into krt8+ adi was marked by a drastic reduction of the transcription factor etv5 which has been shown to be essential for the maintenance of at2 cells37 (fig 6h).both trajectories converged on a large number of alveolar krt8+ adi specific genes representing distinct pathways (fig 4) and their transcriptional regulators including the stress-induced p53 interactor nupr1 a master regulator of epithelial to mesenchymal transition sox4 and many other genes including chromatin remodeling factors such as the histone demethylase kdm5c (fig 6h).]
Trajectories of cell differentiation from club and at2 cells towards krt8+ adi state, with distinct gene expression changes and regulators.

Text 288
10.1038/s41467-020-17358-3
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 8 terminal differentiation trajectory modeling of krt8+adi to at1. a velocity plot displays the umap embedding colored by time point with velocity information overlaid (arrows), indicating terminal differentiation of krt8+ adi into at1 cells. b the velocity phase plot shows the number of spliced and unspliced reads of the at1 marker ager for each cell (points) on the x and y axes, respectively. cells are colored by time point and the black line represents']. Reference sentences:[the ratio of spliced and unspliced reads revealed gradual induction of transcription of the at1 cell marker ager in krt8+ adi cells around day 14 (fig 8b).days 0 36 and 56 representing a baseline with mature at1 cells con- tained a significantly lower ratio of unspliced over spliced ager reads compared to all other time points (fig 8c; wilcoxon rank sum test p < 1e-46).a gradual decrease in ager mrna velocity (fig 8d) was reﬂected with a gradual increase of ager expression (fig 8e).using this information we modeled a pseudotime tra- jectory and determined gene expression dynamics for 1150 sig- nificantly regulated genes along the putative krt8+ adi to at1 transition (fig 8f; supplementary data 5).the differentiation trajectory was split in four phases that were marked by distinct sets of transcriptional regulators developmental genes and signaling pathways (fig 8f g).this was followed by the induction of stress-related signaling pathways such as the p53 pathway and the unfolded protein response pathway featuring increased expression of the corre- sponding transcriptional regulators such as trp53inp1 and atf4 and the peak of krt8 expression (fig 8f g).next a critical pre- at1 stage was marked by the downregulation of the krt8 signature and the induction of a gene expression program with similarities to the epithelial to mesenchymal transition (emt) together with one of its master regulators sox440 (fig 8g).the non- muscle myosin heavy chain iia (myh9) also peaked in pre-at1 cells suggesting important additional cytoskeletal rearrangements and increased cell contractility in the already squamous krt8+ adi cells in the final steps of maturation towards at1 cells (fig 8g).terminally differentiated at1 cells were characterized by high expression of the transcription factors hopx gata6 and wwc1 as well as a large number of developmentally important factors including extracellular matrix proteins and growth factors such as fgf1 npnt and agrn (fig 8g).]
Summary: Trajectory modeling of krt8+ adi to at1 cells reveals gene expression dynamics and distinct phases of differentiation.

Text 289
10.1038/s41590-020-0736-z
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 4 | the trajectory and transcriptional control of neutrophil maturation. a–d, the origin and inter-relationship of neutrophil subpopulations. a, velocity analysis revealing the origin and inter-relationship of neutrophil subpopulations. velocity fields were projected onto the umap plot. b, violin plot of apoptosis scores (go: 0043065) for g5 clusters. c, proportion of apoptotic cells in each cluster, identified by a two-component gaussian mixture model. d, as in a, but only showing g3 neutrophils originating from pb. e–j, the formation of neutrophil subpopulations is driven by both known transcription factors and a large set of uncharacterized ones. e, heatmap showing the row-scaled gene expression of transcription factors known to be involved in granulopoiesis and neutrophil function. f, umap of the regulon activity matrix of neutrophils and 7,209 non-neutrophils under normal conditions. k-means clustering was performed on the first 20 principal components of the regulon activity matrix with cluster number k=7. each cell is assigned the color of its k-means cluster. g, confusion matrix showing the percentage overlap of seurat transcriptome-based clusters with k-means regulon-based clusters. h, heatmap of the t-values of regulon activity derived from a glm of the difference between cells from one neutrophil subpopulation and cells from other non-neutrophil populations. only regulons with at least one absolute t-value>100 are visualized. previously uncharacterized neutrophil-specific transcription factors are marked in red, with binding motifs of these transcription factors shown on the right. i, activities of the four newly identified neutrophil-specific regulons. j, as in h, but with t-values representing activity change between the current developmental stage and the previous one. only regulons with at least one absolute t-value>40 are visualized. regulons are hierarchically clustered based on activation pattern (red and orange: early activated; yellow: g3 inactivated; green: late activated; blue: globally activated). mono, monocyte; dc, dendritic cell.']. Reference sentences:[phagocytosis chemotaxis and neutrophil activation scores increased drastically during the early stages of granulopoiesis peaked at g3 and remained relatively stable thereafter (extended data fig 4a–c).similarly the nadph oxidase score increased dur- ing g0 to g1 and g2 transition peaked at g3 and then decreased by 20% in mature neutrophils (extended data fig 4d).however the dynamics of the oxidase complex subunits varied through neu- trophil differentiation (extended data fig 4e).notably genes related to mitochondria-mediated reactive oxygen spe- cies (ros) production were significantly downregulated during neutrophil maturation further supporting that neutrophil ros production is mainly mediated by phagocytic nadph oxidase (extended data fig 4f).however metabolism-related genes (extended data fig 4g) including those related to glycolysis (extended data fig 4h) were downregulated in mature neutrophils.similarly genes related to glucose transportation were also not upregulated in mature neutrophils (extended data fig 4i).next we traced cell fate and reconstructed cell lineage direction using the recently developed rna velocity approach34 (fig 4a and supplementary fig 3).consistent with monocle (fig 1h) bm maturation (from g2 to g4) followed a single main branch without significant division with g3 bearing long vectors and indicating a strong tendency to progress to g4 (fig 4a and supplementary fig 3).g5c cells were firmly at the end of neutrophil maturation and dif- ferentiation showing the highest apoptosis scores (fig 4b) and pro- portion of apoptotic cells (~20%; fig 4c) among the most mature g5 population.there was also significant apoptosis in g5a and g5b cells (fig 4c) suggesting that death programs can be independent of maturation.interestingly the trajectory of a significant number of g3 neutrophils was towards the peripheral g5a population suggesting mobilization of g3 cells to pb or tissue without first undergoing full g4 maturation (supplementary fig 4).g5a to g5b conver- sion was rarely detected in pb (fig 4a and supplementary fig 4).pb and bm g3 cells consistently overlapped on velocity analysis with some falling into the pb g5a cluster (fig 4d and supplementary fig 4).furthermore pb g3 cells directly differentiated into g5a without going through g4 consistent with the low number of g4 cells in pb and spleen (fig 4d and supplementary fig 4).next we sought to characterize tran- scription factor dynamics across neutrophil differentiation and maturation3839 (fig 4e).to assess specific global gene regulatory networks associated with neutrophil maturity we applied single-cell regulatory network inference and clustering (scenic) analysis40 (fig 4f).there was high consistency between seurat clusters and scenic clusters (fig 4g).this identified 19 neutrophil-specific networks including previously reported transcription factors such as cebpe spi1 and klf5 (fig 4h and supplementary table 5).importantly this analysis also identified four new regulons nfil3 max mlx and xbp1 which are closely related to the expression of neutrophil-specific genes (fig 4i).next we examined the regulatory events responsible for transitioning between consecutive neutrophil differentiation stages (fig 4j).the apoptosis score was measured by the upregulation of the integrated proapoptotic pathway (fig 4b).we then chose the distribution with the higher mean as the apoptotic group and assigned each cell to one of the two groups based on its posterior (fig 4c).]
Patterns related to neutrophil maturation trajectory, transcriptional control, and regulon activity were analyzed, revealing differentiation stages and regulatory networks driving neutrophil development.

Text 290
10.1038/s41590-020-0736-z
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 7 | bacterial infection accelerates g1 cell division and post-mitotic maturation without altering overall neutrophil differentiation programs. a, monocle trajectories of e. coli-challenged neutrophils colored by sample origin (left) and cluster identity (right). each dot represents a single cell. cell orders are inferred from the expression of the most variable genes across all cells. the trajectory direction was determined by biological prior. b, correlation matrices of t-values for regulon activity change during each group transition event under normal conditions (top) or after e. coli challenge (bottom). for each group transition event after challenge, the direct comparison with all normal transition events is shown (bottom). c,d, comparisons of proliferation score (c) and s-phase and g2/m-phase score (d) between control and e. coli-challenged neutrophils for each of the seven clusters. e,f, in vivo edu incorporation assay. e, top: schematic. bottom: gating strategy of the three neutrophil subpopulations: immature (ly6glowcxcr4hi; black), intermediate (ly6ghicxcr4hi; blue) and mature neutrophils (ly6ghicxcr4low; red). f, in vivo edu proliferation assay of neutrophil subsets in bm, pb and spleen at sequential time points with or without e. coli challenge. data are represented as percentages of edu+ cells in the corresponding gated subpopulation. results are the mean±s.d. of three independent experiments (n=3–5 mice for each time point). hi e. coli, heat-inactivated e. coli; lv, liver; pc, peritoneal cavity.']. Reference sentences:[in differential gene expression analy- sis (extended data fig 7a and supplementary table 6) degs in g0 and g1 cells were also preferentially involved in regulating immune effector processes and ros metabolism respectively sug- gesting that immune adaptation to bacterial infection could occur as early as within early progenitor cells (fig 5e and extended data fig 7b).in relatively mature g4 and g5 neutrophils bacterial infection triggered significant upregulation of cytokine production and secretion genes (fig 5e and extended data fig 7b).however the neutrophil differentiation and maturation trajectory was largely maintained in e. coli-challenged mice (fig 7a).the overall stability of the neutrophil differentiation program after bacterial infection was also demonstrated by correlation of scenic transcription regulatory networks in control and challenged sam- ples (fig 7b).while both g1 and g2 cells are proliferative the pro- liferation score increased only in the g1 population (fig 7c) as did genes related to g2/m-phase progression45 while genes related to s-phase progression were paradoxically reduced in g2 cells during acute infection (fig 7d).to test this hypothesis we labeled dividing cells with 5-ethynyl-2′-deoxyuridine (edu) and tracked these cells post-mitotically in bm and pb (fig 7e).in the bm of unchallenged mice edu-labeled cells entered the immature neutro- phil stage after 2 h and intermediate maturation after 12 h and became mature neutrophils at 48 h. the duration of each stage was about 24 h and edu+ cells appeared in pb and spleen after 72 h (fig 7f).these neutrophils mobilized to the periphery following a similar dynamic pattern but over only 2 rather than 3 d—a drastic reduction in the post-mitotic neutrophil maturation period in infected hosts (fig 7f).velocity analysis on all g3–g5 cells in e.coli-challenged mice including those in bm pb spleen and peritoneal cavity revealed irregular multiple directions and short vectors in perito- neal cavity g5 populations indicating a rather inactive transition among these populations (supplementary fig 7).edu—a thymidine analog—can track cells post-mitotically in bm and pb (fig 7e).in the experiment described in extended data fig 7 we conducted differential gene expression analysis in each neutrophil subpopulation using the non-parametric wilcoxon rank-sum test and identified degs with an average expression fold-change > 2.]
Summary: Trajectory analysis reveals altered cell division and maturation patterns in response to bacterial infection, maintaining overall neutrophil differentiation programs.

Text 291
10.1126/science.aba5906
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 4. developmental progression toward homeostatic microglia. (a to c) trajectory plots depicting pseudotime (numbers indicate branching points) (a), gw (b), and state (c). (d) bar plots depicting the percentage of microglia in each state at different gws. (e and f) violin plots of log expression of state-enriched genes for state 1 (gw9 to -11) (e) and state 7 (gw12 to -18) (f). significantly enriched genes per state were compared to all other states. p(adjusted) < 0.05, mast test. (g) bar plot depicting the percentages of overlapping genes between state 1 and 7 genes (table s6) with the top 500 human juvenile (26) and adult (27) microglia genes (table s2). (h) heatmap depicting enrichment of mouse developmental stage genes (5), mouse sensome (1), and human juvenile (26) and adult microglia (27) genes (table s2) across gws visualized as column z-scores of auc values. ys, yolk sac.']. Reference sentences:[microglia undergo developmental transition toward adult homeostatic microglia to further delineate the observed develop- mental progression (fig 3) we performed pseudotimeanalysis(23).assignedpseudotimes (fig 4a) corresponded with the gestational ages (fig 4b) suggesting a gw-dependent trajec- tory.this trajectory contained seven segments or states which were separated by branching points (fig 4 a and c) and differential gene expression analysis was performed to iden- tify state-enriched genes (table s5).state 1 contained mainly gw9 to -11 mi- croglia whereas state 7 largely consisted of gw12 to -18 microglia (fig 4d) which is consistent with the gw-associated clusters (fig s4b).state 1–enriched genes were asso- ciated with microglia development (24) microg- lia activation and phagocytosis (19 20) and glycolysis (13 25) (fig 4e and fig s4c).over the pseudotime trajectory expression of ho- meostatic sensome markers and a different set of microglia activation markers increased and this was most pronounced in state 7 (fig 4f and fig s4d).to confirm the developmental progression of fetal microglia we compared their tran- scriptional profiles with profiles of mouse developmental microglia (5) the mouse sensome (1) and juvenile (26) and adult human microg- lia (27) (fig 4 g and h and table s2).the overlap with juvenile and adult microglia genes increased from ≈2 to 3% of state 1 genes to 10 to 18% of state 7 genes (fig 4g) sug- gesting developmental progression of human microglia from gw9 to -11 (state 1) to gw12 to -18 (state 7).progressive enrichment of mouse and human microglia gene sets in gw9 to -18 fetal microglia was determined using area under the curve (auc) analysis (fig 4h).microglia younger than gw13 were enriched for genes from yolk sac and early mouse microglia (e10 to -16.5) and microglia older than gw13 were enriched for genes from pre- and adult microglia (p3 to -56) with the exception of gw18 microglia which were enriched for genes at all developmental stages (fig 4h).an increasing overlap with mouse sensome genes was observed with progressing fetal gw (fig 4h).also enrich- ment of human juvenile and adult microglia genes gradually increased in fetal microglia with increasing gw (fig 4h).the dna sequences underlying peaks were analyzed for enrichment of putative tf-binding motifs kracht et al. science 369 530–537 (2020) 31 july 2020 5 of 7 fig 4.]
Summary: Trajectory analysis reveals developmental progression of microglia towards homeostatic state, with distinct gene expression patterns across gestational ages.

Text 292
10.1038/s41591-020-1003-4
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 3 | transcriptional modules, pseudotime and clonality define uc cd8+ t-cell lineages. a, selected transcription factor network activity auc score cluster distributions (cells from n=3 donors uc, n=3 donors hc). b, trajectory analysis of cd8+ tcells captures a linear pseudotime progression (cells from n=3 donors uc, n=3 donors hc). c, cluster distribution density along pseudotime. d, heatmap showing relative expression (exp.) of genes significantly (<1% fdr) varying with pseudotime. selected genes are highlighted. negative binomial likelihood ratio test, benjamini–hochberg multiple testing correction. cells from n=3 donors uc, n=3 donors hc. e, expression of selected genes along pseudotime (cells from n=3 donors uc, n=3 donors hc). f, tcr clonality on expression-driven umap overlay showing the distribution of clonal and unexpanded cell populations in cell clusters in health and uc. cells with no reconstructed tcr clonotype are shown in black and are labeled as na (cells from n=3 donors uc, n=3 donors hc). g, tcr clonality density distribution along pseudotime in uc. unexpanded: clones captured in three or fewer cells; q1: cells encompassing the top 20% of the most expanded clones per sample; q5: cells encompassing the bottom 20% of the most expanded clones; q2–4 represent the middle three quantiles. h, upset plot showing tcr clones shared between different clusters, each shared clone visualized as an ‘interaction’ and indicated by a black circle joined by black lines. each unique clone is counted once only, regardless of degree of expansion. the barplot at the top indicates the total number of shared tcr clones for those cluster intersections. cluster intersections without shared tcrs are omitted for clarity.']. Reference sentences:[lineage-specific interactions included il18-il18r1/il18rap and tnf-tnfrsf1a signaling between absorptive but not secretory cells and multiple cd8+ sub- clusters (fig 2de extended data fig 3a–c supplementary fig 2 and supplementary data).0.6 1.5 1.0 00.5 –0.5 –1.0 0.4 0.2 q1 q2 q3 q4 q5 unexpanded na 0 0.15 0.10 0.05 0 fig 3 | transcriptional modules pseudotime and clonality define uc cd8+ t-cell lineages.in contrast il10ra expression was lim- ited to the cd45+ compartment (supplementary fig 3ab).hierarchical clustering highlighted networks expressed exclusively in specific t-cell clusters revealing both new and estab- lished transcriptional regulators (fig 3a extended data fig 5ab and supplementary table 2).we observed a group of modules including egr1 and egr2 whose activity was localized to the cell transition gradient between trm cells and gzmk+ effectors (fig 3a).because our data probably captured t cells asynchro- nously transitioning from one transcriptomic state to the next we performed pseudotime analysis capturing a linear trajectory pro- gressing from naïve-like cells at the start to memory trm gzmk+ effectors and culminating with il26+ cells (fig 3bc).we clustered all genes identified as significantly (false discovery rate (fdr) < 1%) covarying with pseudotime (fig 3d) and identified groups of genes expressed early mid/mid–late and late.in keeping with cluster dis- tribution naïve and early central memory t-cell markers such as ccr7 were expressed early while coinhibitory receptors (havcr2 ctla4) were expressed late (fig 3de).we observed increasing expression of batf ctla4 havcr2 layn and tnfrsf9 while molecules associated with effector function such as gzmk were steadily lost (fig 3c–e).we found that naïve mait and dp t-cell populations exhibited highly diverse clonal structures with most cells expressing a unique tcr cdr3 sequence pair (fig 3f).these constituted the clonally expanded popula- tions with a total of 2438 cells sharing their clonotype with those in other clusters (fig 3h).when we observed a clone in more than two different clusters it also appeared in the trm population (fig 3h).]
Patterns of gene expression changes along a linear trajectory in CD8+ T cells, with distinct clusters representing different stages of cell differentiation and clonality.

Text 293
10.1073/pnas.2003900117
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 3. single-cell transcriptomic analysis of t(8;21) aml at diagnosis. (a) umap analysis of bmmcs from nine primary t(8;21) aml patients after removing batch effects. each dot represents a cell, and the colors represent different cell clusters. the right stacked column chart shows the percentage of each cell cluster in each patient. dc, dendritic cells; immature ery, immature erythroid cells. (b) umap plot of cell cycle state of cells in each cell cluster according to the expression level of cell cycle-specific gene sets. (c) umap plots displaying the expression patterns of cd34, cd117, and the representative markers for cd34+cd117dim, cd34+cd117bri, am, monocytes, dcs, t cells, b cells, and immature erythroid cells. (d) heatmap of the highly expressed genes in cd34+cd117dim, cd34+cd117bri, cd34+cd117bri-s, cd34+cd117bri-g2m, and am cell populations from nine t(8;21) aml patients. the relative expression level of genes (rows) across cells (columns) is shown. (e) violin plot showing the lsc17 score of cd34+cd117dim, cd34+cd117bri, cd34+cd117bri-s, cd34+cd117brig2m, and am clusters. p < 0.01; p < 0.001; p < 0.0001, two-sided wilcoxon test. (f) trajectory analysis using monocle 2, with each dot representing an individual cell and colors representing different cell types. circle 1 represents the beginning (the root), and circle 2 represents the branch point of the trajectory.']. Reference sentences:[cells were partitioned into several clusters using graph-based clustering and visualized by uniform manifold approximation and projection (umap) (fig 3a and si appen- dix fig s3c).annotation of cell cluster identities was deter- mined using specific marker genes (si appendix table s2); expression patterns for the representative genes are displayed in fig 3c.according to the cell cycle score (16) cd34+cd117bri cells could be fur- ther classified as cd34+cd117bri cd34+cd117bri-s and cd34+cd117bri-g2m groups (fig 3b).am cells had high expres- sion levels of genes encoding granule proteins such as prtn3 azu1 and elane (fig 3d).cd34+cd117dim showed higher lsc17 score compared with cd34+cd117bri and am populations which was consistent with the rna-seq result (fig 3e).cd34+cd117dim and cd34+cd117bri clusters were lo- cated at different nodes of the monocle tree (fig 3f).downloaded at #61431990 on august 3 2020 a b c d e f fig 3.]
The trajectory analysis reveals the developmental path of different cell types in single-cell transcriptomics data.

Text 294
10.1016/j.devcel.2020.07.018
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 3. male germ cell development follows a contiguous trajectory (a) t-sne plot of 14,287 germ cells, colored based on fine cell clustering (figure s1d). (b) heatmap visualization showing the expression of 12,607 differentially expressed genes in every cluster for all germ cell (table s5). the proportion of cells derived from each macaque used in this study is shown above as a stacked bar graph. (c) paga graph demonstrating ordering and inter-cluster relationship between the 37 annotated cynomolgus germ cell clusters.']. Reference sentences:[we performed de analysis on the entire dataset to obtain a high-resolution transcriptional atlas that highlights cell-state transitions occurring during male gamete formation— this process identified more than 12600 genes to function in germ cells in a stage-specific manner during spermatogenesis (figure 3b).in the final cluster genes with func- tions in protein binding and protamines are switched on (e.g. tppp2 and prm2) we employed paga to ascertain the connectivity between spermatogenic cell clusters and to derive a trajectory of differen- tiation in an unbiased manner (figure 3c).of genes = 12607 figure 3.]
Patterns related to the differentiation trajectory of germ cells during male gamete formation are shown in the figure.

Text 295
10.1038/s41423-020-00527-1
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 4 distinct trajectory of early t cell development due to tcf-1 deficiency. a trajectory reconstruction of c1, c2, and c3 using monocle 2 revealed three branches. arrows indicate the developmental sequence of these cells. clusters are indicated by the colors in the top panel. genotypes are indicated by the colors in the bottom panel. b gene expression heatmap of the top degs in pseudotemporal order. dn1-cell fate 1 and dn1-cell fate 2 reprogramming trajectories (including prebranch) are shown on the left and right (left panel), respectively. representative gene trajectories are shown in the right panel. average gene expression dynamics and gene counts in all four clusters are shown on the right. c trajectory reconstruction of c4, c5, and c6 using monocle 2 revealed three branches. arrows indicate the developmental sequence of these cells. clusters are indicated by the colors in the top panel. genotypes are indicated by the colors in the bottom panel. d gene expression heatmap of the top degs in pseudotemporal order. dn2–dn3-cell fate 1 and dn2–dn3-cell fate 2 reprogramming trajectories (including prebranch) are shown on the left and right (left panel), respectively. average gene expression dynamics and gene counts in all four clusters are shown on the right']. Reference sentences:[to explore the effect of tcf-1 deficiency on the fate of early t cell commitment at a single-cell resolution we categorized the cells based on their transcriptional similarities in a pseudotemporal manner using monocle 2 which is an algorithm for the lineage reconstruction of biological processes.35 ordering dn1 cells in pseudotime revealed a trajectory with a single branch point that originated from c3 and then bifurcated into two branches that were enriched with cells from c1 and c2 (fig 4a top panel).the cells in the root (dn1-prebranch) of the trajectory were a mixture of cells retrieved from the wt tcf7−/− and tcf7ﬂ/ﬂvav-cre dn1 subsets (fig 4a bottom panel).branching expression analysis modeling (beam) identified the significant degs (fdr < 5%) which drove the branching of single-cell trajectories (fig 4b).cells in this branch were enriched with dn1 cells from tcf7−/− and tcf7ﬂ/ﬂvav-cre mice with high expression of batf3 zap70 rorc il27ra id2 il7r thy1 and icos (fig 4b and supplementary fig 4a).subsequently we ordered dn2–dn3 cells in pseudotime and reconstructed a trajectory with a single branch point leading from c6 (composed of wt and tcf7ﬂ/ﬂlck-cre dn3 cells) to two branches corresponding to the cell fates of c4 and c5 clusters (fig 4c top panel).dn2–dn3 cells from wt and tcf7ﬂ/ﬂlck-cre mice were mostly located in the root of cluster c6 (fig 4c bottom panel).comparatively the cells located in the lower branch (dn2–dn3-cell fate 2) showed high expression of e2f2 ccna2 ccnb1 birc5 and mki67 (fig 4d and supplementary fig 4b).cluster c4 appears to have a higher risk of malignant transition than other dn3 subsets as shown above ablation of tcf-1 at early phases (germline or hsc) could redirect dn2–dn3 cell fate towards a distinct cellular destiny but no significant effects on t cell identity were observed in the absence of tcf-1 at the dn3 stage (fig 4c).single-cell trajectory analysis a single-cell trajectory was analyzed using a matrix for cells and gene expression in monocle 2 as shown in fig 4 and supplementary fig 4.monocle constructed the final tree structure by using a max_components parameter equal to 2 for fig 4a c. other settings used the default parameters.the gene expression heatmaps in fig 4b d were based on the lineage trajectory in fig 4a c. they were generated by the “plot_genes_branched_- heatmap” function of monocle 2.]
Distinct trajectories of early cell development due to deficiency in a transcription factor. Branching patterns in pseudotime reveal cell fate transitions and gene expression dynamics.

Text 296
10.1038/s41467-020-18155-8
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 3 trajectory analysis predicts precursors of mait and γδ t cells. a, b far left: umap plots of mait (a) and γδ t cells (b) show schematic representation of trajectories. left to far right: t-sne plots of mait (a) and γδ t cells (b) colored by cell clusters (left), palantir pseudotime (right), and palantir branching probabilities (far right). c projections of the mait clusters to inkt clusters by scamp-cluster. d heat maps illustrate log2-transformed fold change of frequency of each trgv/trdv gene pair in a given cell cluster with respect to all γδ t cells.']. Reference sentences:[specifically we simulated random events of the overlapping number of degs between the inkt and tγδ subsets as depicted in supplementary fig 3a and found that the number of genes commonly upregulated or downregulated in side by side comparisons was significantly higher than random expectation (supplementary fig 3b).using the same algorithm we compared transcriptional similarities between inkt cells γδ t cells t helper cd4 t cells and ilcs using a published dataset1920 and found inkt and γδ t cells have higher similarity compared to others which is consistent with our previous report18 (supplementary fig 3c).additionally the overlap of degs and the correlation of differential-expression patterns between subsets were significantly stronger for cytokines and receptors as compared to the other genes (supplementary fig 3d e).volcano plots and heat maps also showed that genes reportedly associated with lineage differentiation18 were commonly shared between inkt and tγδ subsets (supplementary fig 3f g).we further analyzed the potential precursor–progeny relation- ships between subpopulations of mait and γδ t cells by deriving a pseudo-temporal ordering of cells along differentiation trajec- tories using palantir (fig 3) and monocle 3 (supplementary fig 12).in the mait cells trajectory analysis showed three linear differentiation pathways; mait1 cells (m1–m3–m4–m5) mait2 cells (m1–m2) and mait17 cells (m1–m3–m6–m7–m8; fig 3a).m6 and m7 were localized close to nktp in combined umap (fig 2d) and they shared their signature genes with nktp (n1) (fig 3c and sup- plementary fig 13) indicating they are immature mait17 (mait17i) cells.although m2 mait cells did not co-localize with nkt2 cells in combined umap analysis (fig 2d middle panels) they shared their sig- nature genes mainly with nkt2 cells (fig 3c and supplementary fig 13) suggesting that m2 corresponds to mait2 cells that we identified in ﬂow cytometry (fig 1a).in the trajectory analysis of γδ t cells two differentiation pathways were identified: g1–g2/3–g4–g5–g6 for tγδ17 cells and g1–g2/g3–g7-1– g7-2 for tγδ1 cells (fig 3b).based on this trajectory we annotated g1 as the most immature precursors of γδ t cells (tγδp) g2 and g3 as common precursors of tγδ1 and tγδ17 cells (immature tγδ1/17 or tγδ1/17i) g4 and g5 as tγδ17i cells (fig 3b and supplementary fig 10a–c).consistent with this g1 had more diverse tcr genotypes than g2–g7 (fig 3d).vγ4+ cells were a major genotype of g4–g6 whereas vγ6+ cells were only found in g6 as they are fetal-derived remnants (fig 3d).however m2 (mait2) had similarity with n3 (nkt2) and n1 (nktp) was more likely m6 (mait17i) in their transcriptional nature (fig 3c and supple- mentary fig 13).]
Summary: Trajectory analysis reveals differentiation pathways of cell subsets, showing precursor-progeny relationships between mait and γδ t cells.

Text 297
10.1038/s41467-020-18231-z
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 2 specification of hypothalamic patterning during embryonic development. a umap plot showing e11–e13 developing diencephalon with rna velocity trajectories (left), and umap plot showing the four main molecularly distinct regions of the developing hypothalamus and prethalamus (mediobasal hypothalamus, mammillary hypothalamus, anterior hypothalamus, and prethalamus) (right). b dendrogram showing a developmental hierarchy of the entire diencephalon and associated regulons. c heatmap showing a key subset of pattern-specific genes in major hypothalamic regions and prethalamus.']. Reference sentences:[in total 129151 cells were pro- filed (supplementary fig 2a b).using molecular markers of known hypothalamic regions and cell types2 we were able to annotate all major hypothalamic and adjacent brain regions and major cell types at each individual age (supplementary fig 2c d supplementary fig 3a).to do this we re-clustered data from e11 to e13 which correspond to the peak period of hypothalamic neurogenesis (fig 2a supplementary fig 7)45.using previously identified region-specific markers as a reference2 we observed a clear segre- gation of spatially distinct neuronal precursors and progenitors (fig 2a supplementary fig 7).we also identified a clear separation between mitotic neural progenitors and postmitotic neural precursors (fig 2a supple- mentary fig 7).rna velocity paired with regulon analysis using scenic46 identified four main developmental trajectories which give rise to mammillary hypothalamus prethalamus anterior hypothalamus and mediobasal hypothalamus (fig 2a).hierarchical gene regulatory networks showed multiple regulons that are potentially involved in the differentiation of neural progenitors into neural precursors from the major spatial subdivisions of the developing hypothalamus (fig 2b).multiple known and previously undescribed molecular mar- kers including many transcription factors that act as positional codes and regulons were further identified for each of these regions (fig 2c supplementary data 4).the first of these regions is found in the dorsomedial hypothalamus and is marked by expression of sst cited1 otp and six6 (fig 2c).using the hydd to annotate both control and mutant data we identified changes in gene expression and cell composition that match previously reported findings (supple- mentary fig 20) where we observed a substantial increase in undifferentiated npc along with a corresponding reduction in the number of cells expressing markers of hypothalamic and prethalamic neuronal precursors (supplementary fig 19 and 20).rna velocity further highlights differences in developmental trajectories between control and mutants (supplementary fig 20).in particular strong loss of markers shared by both hypothalamus and prethalamus such as meis2 sp9 and arx (supplementary fig 20 supplementary data 7) was observed.analysis of nkx2-1creer/creer mutants and heterozygous littermate controls revealed changes in cluster densities in the mutant (fig 4 supplementary fig 21 and 22).we observed a broad loss of markers specific to nkx2-1 positive ventral hypothalamic structures such as arc vmh pmn and mmn but not the smn (fig 4c d supplementary fig 23 and 24 supplementary data 8) with both the relative expression levels and the number of cells expressing these markers reduced.an increase in the fraction of cells expressing prethalamic markers was detected (fig 4b c supplementary fig 21) and increased cre expression in the prethalamus was also observed in these mice (supplementary fig 22).in contrast to controls prethalamic cells in mutant mice expressed cre implying that ventral hypothalamic cells that normally express nkx2.1 may have acquired prethalamic identity (supplementary fig 22).furthermore our rna velocity analysis strongly indicates altered trajectories between mediobasal hypothalamus mammillary hypothalamus and prethalamus (supplementary fig 22.)to investigate this further rnascope probes against sp9 meis2 and cre were used to visualize the location of these cre-positive prethalamic cells and substantial co-localization of prethalamic markers and cre expression was observed in the region normally occupied the by the ventral hypothalamus in controls (supplementary fig 22).ish confirmed that there was an increase in the absolute size of the prethalamus and its proportion in the diencephalon (supplementary fig 23).an increase in the number of cells expressing markers of npc in the smn and mmn was also seen while nkx2-1 negative hypothalamic regions such as the pvn/son are unaffected (fig 4d supplementary fig 24).there was no significant difference in gene expressions between cre+ and cre− pre thalamic cells (supplementary fig 22) but using regulon analysis mutant prethalamus showed enriched activity for transcription factors that are enriched in the mediobasal hypothalamus such as foxp1 six3 and zfhx3 (supplementary fig 25).]
Summary: Identification of distinct developmental trajectories in hypothalamic regions during embryonic development using single-cell transcriptomics.

Text 298
10.1038/s41467-020-18231-z
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 1 overview of generation of the hypothalamus scrna-seq dataset. a umap plot showing scrna-seq data obtained from the developing diencephalon (including the prethalamus and hypothalamus) between e10 and e16, e18, p4, p8, p14, and p45. rna velocity marks neuronal or glial (oligodendrocytes, astrocytes, ependymal cells, and tanycytes) trajectories. b umap plot showing neuronal clusters across the entire course of hypothalamus development. c heatmap showing subtypes of neuronal clusters based on neuropeptide and transcription factor expression.']. Reference sentences:[for e10–e16 both prethalamus and hypothalamus were collected whereas for e18–p45 only the hypothalamus was profiled (fig 1a supplementary fig 1).umap plotting paired with rna velocity showed separate neuronal and glial trajectories (fig 1a) where glial trajectories in turn gave rise to trajectories leading to oligodendrocytes astrocytes ependymal cells and tanycytes (fig 1a).trajectories leading from neuronal progenitors to mature neurons were then extracted to identify different subclusters of hypothalamic neurons (fig 1b).a total of 50 different major neuronal clusters across the hypothalamus were identified distinguished by unique (agrp hcrt and pomc) or shared (th gal and pnoc) neuropeptides and neurotransmitter expression as well as transcription factor expression that acts as a positional code to identify the location of these neuronal clusters (fig 1c).however owing to the high cellular complexity of the hypothalamus these neuronal clusters do not necessarily correspond to individual cell types but rather to clusters of neurons that share common spatial location and/or develop- mental origin which can be seen by the fact that several neuronal clusters show enriched expression for synaptic vesicle transpor- ters for both glutamate (slc17a6) and gaba (slc32a1) (fig 1c).these two classes of ventricular cells begin to diverge at e13 with differential expression of foxj1 and rax—established markers of ependymal cells and tanycytes—first detected at this age (fig 1a supple- mentary fig 6)44.this lh cluster consists primarily of glutamatergic neurons with a small subpopulation of gabaergic neurons (supplementary fig 10 supplementary data 6).cells within this lh cluster express multiple transcription factors that are also selectively expressed in other hypothalamic regions including the vmh pmn mmn and id as well as a mixture of neuropeptides expression (supplementary fig 10).this is clearly seen in the pvn/son cluster (supplementary fig 11 supplementary data 6).selective expression of onecut2 cartpt and zic1 characterizes ventrolateral domain that based on its position likely corre-a sponds to the developing son (supplementary fig 11).we observed partially overlapping domains of expression of the transcription factors sp8 and sp9 (supplementary fig 12 supplementary data 6) which play critical roles in the development of telencephalic interneurons51.ish analysis revealed enriched expression of sp8 in anterior prethalamus and id while sp9 was enriched in posterior prethalamus (supplementary fig 12).subclustering of the vmh allowed us to detect two distinct clusters which corresponded to separate anterior and posterior domains of gene expression (supplementary fig 13 supplemen- tary data 6).a clear distinction between these anterior and posterior domains was detected until e16 both spatially and at the molecular level (supplementary fig 13).two unannotated clusters appear to reﬂect contamination from the habenula and pituitary that occurred during dissection (supplementary fig 14).a subset of the neurons in the arc cluster share molecular markers of neural precursors in the pmn and dmh implying that these cells may have migrated to the arc from these regions (sup- plementary fig 14).we also identified a cluster that closely resembled hypotha- lamic npc (supplementary fig 15) but which also co-expressed astrocyte- ependymal and/or tanycyte-specific marker genes.this same gene expression pattern was found to be enriched in a subset of hypothalamic npc that were detected from e11 onwards and which may represent npc that are competent to generate glia (supplementary fig 15).these vmh- enriched genes have varying levels of expression and specificity across the full course of the hypothalamus development (supplementary fig 16).we likewise observed that different subsets of core glutamatergic vmh neurons arise from distinct anterior or posterior domains of the embryonic vmh (supplementary fig 13).some of these clusters remain restricted to anterior or posterior regions of the adult vmh as noted in the original study55 (fig 3d supplementary fig 17a b).however the majority of vmh neuronal subtypes originate from both anterior and posterior domains of the developing vmh (supplementary fig 17) and are distributed widely along the anterior–posterior axis of the adult vmh55.scrna-seq analysis of control and mutant animals at e12.5 reveals a couple of mutant-specific cell clusters (supplementary fig 18–20).using the hydd to annotate both control and mutant data we identified changes in gene expression and cell composition that match previously reported findings (supple- mentary fig 20) where we observed a substantial increase in undifferentiated npc along with a corresponding reduction in the number of cells expressing markers of hypothalamic and prethalamic neuronal precursors (supplementary fig 19 and 20).one of these clusters is strongly enriched for g2/m phase markers such ube2c rrm2 and ccnb1 (supplementary figure 19).flow cytometry data also demonstrated a substantially higher fraction of npcs in the g2/ m phase in mutant mice (supplementary fig 19 and 20) as has been previously reported in nonneuronal cells that show high levels of canonical wnt signaling56.genes that could identify the vmh across at least three developmental ages or at least two developmental ages if the gene in question could also selectively specific cell clusters in the adult vmh were selected as the final vmh gene sets (supplementary fig 16).to identify the developmental origin of major cell clusters in the vmh key gene sets from the anterior and posterior vmh were extracted from hydd (supplementary fig 13 supplementary data 6).]
Patterns related to developmental trajectories of neuronal and glial cells in the hypothalamus are shown in the figure.

Text 299
10.1126/sciadv.aba1190
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 2. identification of diverse reprogramming subgroups and construction of reprogramming trajectories. (a) pcas showing subgroups present in d2 (left), d8 (middle), and d16+ (right) cells determined by rca, based on their correlation to cells of various lineages in the rca panel. each color represents a subgroup. gray color indicates the minority outlier cells, which do not belong to the indicated subgroups. (b) boxplots showing single-cell expression of the differentially expressed genes cdk1 (d2), gdf3 (d8), mmp2 (d16+), and lin28a (d16+) across the time points and their respective subgroups. lines represent the median expression. (c) left: trajectory of reprogramming cells constructed from the 10x scrna-seq libraries based on ddrtree dimension reduction. colors represent time points. right: pseudotime calculated by monocle. color indicates pseudotime. (d) stacked columns indicating the distribution of reprogramming time points across the pseudotemporal states. colors represent time points. (e) superimposition of d8 subgroups (left) and d16+ subgroups (right) on the trajectory of reprogramming. colors represent subgroups. (f) stacked columns revealing the distribution of d8 subgroups across the pseudotemporal states. colors represent d8 subgroups, and gray color indicates cells of the other time points. (g) superimposition of expression of the d8 subgroup-specific genes (rfc3 and gdf3) and the d16+ subgroup–specific genes (nanog, mmp2, and lin28a) on the reprogramming trajectories.']. Reference sentences:[d2 cells were marked by four distinct subgroups (g1 to g4) among which g1-2 cells displayed lower correlation to the fibroblasts and mesenchymal stem cells (mscs) (fig 2a and fig s2c).on the other hand d8 cells were distributed across three discrete subgroups (fig 2a and fig s2c).likewise two subpopulations were present in d16+ cells among which g2 cells were highly associated with pscs while g1 cells maintained detectable correlation to the mscs adipose cells and endothelial cells other than pscs (fig 2a and fig s2c).it includes cell cycle–associated genes such as cdk1 implicating the importance of cell cycle at the early stage of reprogramming which is in agreement with the previous study (fig 2b) (14).for instance dna replication factor rfc3 was vastly expressed in d8 g2-3 cells and pluripotent marker gdf3 was specifically expressed in the d8 g3 cells (fig 2b and table s1).on the other hand epithelial genes and pluripotent genes including cdh1 nanog and lin28a were specifically expressed in d16+ g2 cells (fig 2b and table s1).pseudotemporal trajectory of the reprogramming process we next analyzed 10x libraries to construct the trajectory (16 17) of cellular reprogramming which consisted of nine states and four branching events (fig 2c).notably pseudotime highly correlated with the actual reprogramming time points (fig 2 c and d).2020; 6 : eaba1190 11 september 2020 scie n c e a d v a nces | resea r ch a rt icl e 4 of 18 a b g c d e f fig 2.to answer we identified the rca subgroups from 10x libraries in the same manner as fluidigm scrna-seq libraries and superimposed the rca subgroup identities on the trajectory map (fig 2e and fig s3a).as for d8 subgroups g1 cells enriched across the states other than state 9 (successfully reprogrammed) whereas g3 cells were mostly found in state 9 (fig 2 e and f).on the other hand d8 g2 cells mainly belonged to states 4 and 9 (fig 2 e and f).intrigu- ingly state 4 (627 cells) composed almost entirely of d8 g2 (544 cells) (fig 2 e and f).expectedly d16+ g2 cells were the major constit- uents of state 9 whereas cells of d16+ g1 were enriched in both state 8 (non- reprogrammed) and state 9 corroborating their partial or non- reprogrammed identities (fig 2e and fig s3f).further subgroup-specific markers were expressed differentially along the pseudotime axis (fig 2g).rfc3 (d8 g2-3) gdf3 (d8 g3) and nanog and lin28a (d16+ g2) were expressed highly in the cells on the successful reprogramming trajectory whereas mmp2 (d16+ g1) showed the opposite trend (fig 2g).]
Patterns related to the trajectory of reprogramming cells, including subgroups at different time points, pseudotime, and distribution of subgroups across pseudotemporal states.

Text 300
10.1126/sciadv.aba1190
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 4. refined classification and enrichment of early-intermediate reprogramming cells. (a and b) t-sne plots indicating the cd13 antigen profiles (a) and seurat clusters (b) of the d8 cd13-sorted 10x libraries. (c) rca clustering of the d8 cd13-sorted 10x libraries. (d) magic plot showing the correlation between cd13 and gdf3. colors represent the expression levels of nanog. (e) heatmap showing the degs of cd13 clusters. genes highlighted in orange are expressed highly in d8 g2 and g3. (f) violin plot demonstrating the expression of gdf3 across the clusters. (g) left: trajectory constructed by the 10x scrna-seq libraries of various time points and d8 cd13-sorted cells. right: superimposition of the cd13 clusters. (h) qrt-pcr showing the relative expression in the d8 cd13 & cd201-sorted cells. n=2; error bar indicates sd. (i) left: heatmap showing the degs of d8 cd13 & cd201-sorted cells determined from their bulk rna-seq libraries. go terms and the associated genes are indicated on the right. (j) normalized tra-1-60+ colonies upon knockdown of genes highly expressed in cd13+cd201+ cells at d5 of reprogramming. representative images are shown above. n=3; error bar indicates sd. (k) quantification of tra-1-60+ colonies yielded from the d8 cd13 & cd201-sorted cells. representative images are shown above. n=2; error bar indicates sd.gapdh, glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase; mhc, major histocompatibility complex.']. Reference sentences:[expectedly clustering showed two distinct groups with differential cd13 expression (fig 4a and fig s6b).to finely characterize the subpop- ulations we performed seurat analysis for 10x libraries of d8 cd13-sorted cells and identified eight clusters among which clus- ters 5 to 8 were mainly composed of cd13+ cells (fig 4b and fig s6d).we then performed rca analysis for the cd13-sorted 10x libraries (fig 4c).in general cd13 clusters exhibited similar cor- relation patterns to the d8 rca subgroups in terms of the mesen- chymal lineages and pluripotency (fig 4c).for instance distinctly separate cd13+ clusters (5 to 8) demonstrated high correlation to the mesenchymal lineages but not to escs resembling the cor- relation pattern of d8 g1 cells (fig 4c).on the contrary closely clustered cd13− clusters (1 3 and 4) showed the opposite pattern similar to that of d8 g3 (fig 4c).on the other hand cells of cluster 2 exhibited a transitional profile (fig 4c).a strongly negative correlation was observed between the expression of cd13 and gdf3 in d8 cells (fig 4d).rca and magic findings were corroborated by dge analysis for cd13 clusters (fig 4e).briefly cd13+ clusters 5 6 and 8 exten- sively shared degs including mesenchymal gene snai2 and genes associated with collagen catabolic process whereas cd13− clusters 1 3 and 4 highly expressed d8 g2-3–specific genes among which clusters 1 and 4 exhibited the highest expression of d8 g3 marker gdf3 (fig 4 e and f).furthermore the pseudotem- poral analysis for 10x libraries of d8 cd13-sorted cells and cells of the other time points revealed the localization of cd13+ clusters 5 6 and 8 and cd13− clusters 1 3 and 4 at the early and late pseudotime respectively (fig 4g).in line with their high gdf3 expression cells of clusters 1 and 4 concentrated at the branch shared by d16+ cells whereas cells of cluster 3 were found at the unsuccessful reprogramming branch (fig 4g).on the other hand clusters 2 and 7 shared degs including the somatic gene junb and surface marker cd201 (fig 4e).consistent with the facs cor- relation results magic analysis indicated the extensive correla- tion between cd13 and cd44 across the clusters but not between cd13 and cd201 (fig 4e and fig s6 f to h).the inconsistency between cd13 and cd201 was mostly contributed by the interme- diary clusters 2 and 7 which displayed low cd13 but high cd201 expression (fig 4e and fig s6 d and i).cd13+cd201+ cells highly expressed the fibroblast- associated genes mesenchymal genes and genes associ- ated with extracellular matrix and cell adhesion (fig 4 h and i and table s1).on the contrary cd13−cd201− cells highly ex- pressed genes related to pluripotency epithelial lineage cell divi- sion and stem cell population maintenance (fig 4 h and i and table s1).however cd13−cd201+ cells exhibited an intermediate transcriptional profile (fig 4 h and i and table s1).2020; 6 : eaba1190 11 september 2020 scie n c e a d v a nces | resea r ch a rt icl e 8 of 18 a b c d e i j h k f g fig 4.moreover depletion of genes highly expressed in the cd13+cd201+ population resulted in higher numbers of repro- grammed colonies (fig 4j).notably d8 cd13−cd201− population gave rise to the highest number of tra-1-60+ colonies followed by cd13−cd201+ (intermediate) and cd13+cd201+ cells (lowest) (fig 4k).]
Summary: Trajectory analysis revealed distinct clusters with differential expression of cd13 and cd201, influencing reprogramming efficiency.

Text 301
10.1016/j.ccell.2020.08.014
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 3. cell trajectories of adrenal sympathoadrenal lineages (a) umap visualization of all 49,209 cells from four fetal adrenal glands. sympathoadrenal cells (scps, chromaffin cells [chcs], and sympathoblasts) are circled and selected for re-clustering.']. Reference sentences:[cellular diversity within the developing sympathoadrenal lineages of fetal adrenal glands to gain further insight into the cellular state within sympathoa- drenal lineages of fetal adrenal glands we performed a second round of clustering for only scps sympathoblasts and chro- maffin cells (figure 3a table s4).of them scps were relatively quiescent while chromaffin cells contained a substantial number of cycling cells (figure 3b).interestingly compared with cycling chromaffin cells non-cycling chromaffin cells expressed a more differentiated signature including the prph npy and ntrk1 genes which have previously been used for defining a committed noradrenergic fate (furlan et al. 2013) (figure 3c).we also found that chromaffin cell markers such as tyrosine hydroxylase (th) and chgb were expressed in chro- maffin cells and sympathoblasts but at relatively higher levels in sympathoblasts (figure 3c).cycling chromaffin progenitors also preferentially gave rise to more differentiated chromaffin cells (figure 3f cell #2).notably trajectory analysis also showed a low differentiation tendency from scps and chromaffin pro- genitors to sympathoblasts (figure 3f cell #1 and #2).by contrast differentiated chromaffin cells and sympathoblasts represented two terminal states without potential to differentiate into other cell types (figure 3f cell #3 and cell #4).as expected differentiation into chromaffin cells and sympathoblasts was accompanied by decreased sox10 expression while determination of the fate of chromaffin cells was accompanied by increased phox2b expression (figure 3g).in particular expression of ascl1 and htr3a as well as the cell-cycle marker mki67 showed diver- gent patterns between two branches of differentiation and high expression of them coincided with chromaffin cell differen- tiation (figure 3g).]
Cell trajectories show differentiation patterns from progenitors to terminal states within sympathoadrenal lineages.

Text 302
10.1038/s41586-020-2734-6
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 3 | derivation of its cells during reprogramming. a, in vivo te signatures on fdl projection overlaid with single-cell trajectories constructed using monocle3 (black lines). blue arrow indicates the te-enriched cell population. b, experimental design for derivation of itscd21n. c, phase-contrast image of itscd21n. scale bar, 100 μm. d, immunostaining of itscd21n with p63, tfap2c, gata2 and krt7. scale bar, 100 μm. representative images from n = 4. e, sdc1 and hla-g immunostaining of syncytiotrophoblast (st) (left) and extravillous trophoblast (evt) (right) cells, respectively, differentiated from itscd21n. scale bar, 100 μm. representative images from n = 4. f, representation of itscd21n engraftment assay by injection into nod-scid mice. the urine, blood serum and lesions were examined 9 days post-injection (d.p.i). representative positive results for hcg pregnancy test from urine samples collected from itscd21ninjected mice compared to the vehicle controls. n = 3. g, immunohistochemical staining of sdc1 (left) and hla-g (right) in the lesions collected from itscd21n engrafts in nod-scid mice. no lesions were evident in vehicle controls. arrows indicate hla-g-positive trophoblast cells. scale bar, 200 μm. representative images from n = 4. for more details on sample numbers and statistics, see ‘statistic and reproducibility’ in methods.']. Reference sentences:[analysis of the gene expression of pluripotency-associated cell-surface markers22 across clusters informed a flow-cytometry isolation strategy to analyse purified populations of reprogramming intermediates using bulk-level assays (extended data fig 3a supple- mentary fig 1 methods).bulk rna-seq data obtained from different time points during primed and naive reprogramming confirmed our isolation strategy (extended data fig 3b).to study the reprogramming pathways in different medium conditions we therefore isolated reprogramming intermediates in additional naive media: 5ilaf2 nhsm1 and rset (extended data fig 3c–e methods).day-13 and day-21 intermediates from rset medium transitioned along the naive t2ilgoy trajectory but ultimately switched branches which established the fact that ips cells cultured in rset (at passages 3 and 10) clustered near primed ips cells (fig 2a extended data fig 3f sup- plementary table 4).these observations were confirmed by scoring these reprogramming intermediates using the primed and naive gene signatures (fig 2b extended data fig 3g supplementary table 5).we found a subpopulation of cells to be highly enriched for the te signatures in the single-cell trajectory of naive reprogramming (fig 3a extended data fig 7g).thus we transi- tioned naive reprogramming intermediates at day 21 into the recently reported human ts cell medium7 (fig 3b); we observed the appear- ance of cells that morphologically resemble ts cells that we named ‘induced ts cells’ (hereafter itscd21n) (fig 3c).further characteri- zation showed that itscd21n express key markers that define human te and ts cells726 such as p63 tfap2c gata2 and krt7 (fig 3d extended data fig 8a).this demonstrated that itscd21n can be differenti- ated into syncytiotrophoblast cells characterized by sdc1-positive multinucleated cells and extravillous trophoblast cells defined by upregulation of hla-g a key histocompatibility molecule that is expressed in placenta726 (fig 3e extended data fig 8c).nine days post-injection mouse urine was positive for hcg using the over-the-counter human preg- nancy tests (fig 3f methods) and hcg was also detected in the blood serum (extended data fig 8g).we further confirmed engraftment and differentiation by histology analyses of the lesions formed show- ing sdc1-positive syncytiotrophoblast-like cells and hla-g-positive extravillous-trophoblast-like cells comparable to previously reported primary tissue-derived ts cells7 (fig 3g extended data fig 8hi).for spanning-tree progression analysis of density-normalized events (spade) analysis (extended data fig 3e) a three-step antibody labelling procedure was used: (1) rat anti-human igm ssea-3 (1:10 bd); mouse anti-human nlgn4x igg2a (1:128 csiro cstem3022); (2) mouse anti-rat igm pe (1:200 ebiosciences); bv605 goat anti-mouse igg (1:100 biolegend); and (3) bv421 mouse anti-human cd326 (epcam) (1:100 biolegend); buv395 mouse anti-human tra-1-60 (1:100 bd); bv711 mouse anti-human cd24 (1:50 bd); mouse anti-human ssea-4-pe-vio770 (1:20 miltenyi biotec); mouse anti-human f11r igg was conjugated to apc by the walter and eliza hall institute of medical research (wehi) antibody facilities (1:200 csiro cstem2722); apc-cy7 cd13 (1:500 bioleg- end); anti-tra-1-85 (cd147)-viobright fitc (1:20 miltenyi biotec).the spade tree indicates a clear transition of cell populations at the early stages of reprogramming (from day 0 to day 7) with reprogramming in nhsm and rset conditions exhibiting a more primed-like transition (extended data fig 3e).in particular the rset medium formed a separated branch on the spade tree in contrast to reprogramming in 5ilaf and t2ilgoy media (extended data fig 3e).the same gene signature calculations were also applied to determine the strength of te epiblast (epi) and primitive endoderm (pe) gene signatures in each single cell (fig 3a extended data fig 7g).rna-seq of reprogramming intermediates for the bulk rna-seq of the facs-purified reprogramming intermedi- ates (extended data fig 3) rna extraction was performed using the rneasy micro kit (qiagen cat.for bulk rna-seq of reprogramming intermedi- ates specific library information can be found in extended data fig 3f and supplementary table 5. n = 2 biological replicates were obtained for each condition except for day 13 primed (n = 3) day 13 naive (n = 3) and passage 3 primed (n = 4) (fig 2a extended data fig 3b f 5b c).for the scoring of primed and naive signatures gene expression trends and spearman correlation comparisons the fpkm values were aver- aged across replicates before log2 + 1 transformation (fig 2b extended data fig 3g 6f 7d–f).for fig 3c–e these experiments were repeated in n = 4 biological replicates (4 independent experiments from two donors) with similar results and representative images are shown in the fig for fig 3f n = 3 biological replicates 3 independent its cell lines were injected into three mice and similar results were obtained and representative results are shown in the fig for fig 3g 4 lesions were generated from its cell lines collected and analysed similar results were obtained and representative images are shown (n = 4 biological replicates).for extended data fig 3d 4 experiments were inde- pendently performed (from two donors) with similar results and representative images are shown in the figures (n = 4 biological repli- cates).for extended data fig 3e n = 2 biological replicates (from two donors) were used for analysis.extended data fig 3 | isolation and characterization of intermediates during reprogramming into several naive human induced pluripotent states.g epi and pe signatures on fdl with single-cell trajectories constructed using monocle3 (43791 cells) related to fig 3a.]
Summary: Single-cell trajectories reveal reprogramming patterns towards induced trophoblast cells, confirmed by gene signatures and differentiation markers.

Text 303
10.1016/j.celrep.2020.108222
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 3. transcriptional dynamics across the differentiation trajectory (a) schematic of the first major lineage bifurcation. escs differentiate into extraembryonic pre-like or pre-epib cell states. the pseudotime trajectory was replotted for the 600 single-cell transcriptomes from days 0, 2, and 4. (b) heatmap showing unbiased clustering of transcriptional programs for the 600 single-cell transcriptomes in (a). cells are ordered by their pseudotime score radiating left (pre branch, blue) and right (pre-epib branch, orange) away from the progenitor esc population (center, red). the top differentially expressed genes for each cluster are annotated (p < 1eà10). (c) graphs showing the average expression of each gene expression module from (b), plotted over pseudotime. (d) schematic of the second major lineage bifurcation. pre-epib cells form pgc-like cells and post-epib cells (which, in turn, form the ps). the pseudotime trajectory was replotted for the 800 single-cell transcriptomes from days 2, 4, 6, and 8. (e) heatmap showing unbiased clustering of transcriptional programs for the 800 single-cell transcriptomes in (d). cells are ordered by their pseudotime score radiating left (pgc branch, yellow) and right (post-epib branch, lime green; forming the ps, dark green) away from the progenitor pre-epib population (center, orange). the top differentially expressed genes for each cluster are annotated (p < 1eà10). (f) graphs showing average expression of each gene expression module from (e), plotted over pseudotime.']. Reference sentences:[we collated gen- eral naive and primed pluripotency modules (kalkan et al. 2017) and hierarchically clustered cells from days 0–6 by their expression of these 3 gene modules (figure 3g).we observed a similar switch in pluripotency state between preimplantation and postimplantation epiblast-like cells in ebs (figure 3g).in contrast postimplantation epiblast-like cells expressed primed and general pluripotency modules (figure 3g) with expression of all pluripotency factors sharply decreasing with increased pseudotime along the postim- plantation epiblast branch toward ps-like cells (figures 3e and 3f).cell reports 33 108222 october 6 2020 5 article ll open access figure 3.in ebs pgc-like cells appear to maintain their naive status and instead arise from the naive preimplanta- tion epiblast-like population (figure 3g).thus barcode recombination occurred after the major bifurcation of preimplantation epiblast-like cells to form postimplantation epiblast-like cells and the pgc-like line- age (figure 3d) and after expression of the naive pluripotency module.]
Summary: Trajectory patterns of gene expression modules during differentiation from ESCs to various cell states, with distinct lineage bifurcations and pseudotime progression.

Text 304
10.1016/j.celrep.2020.108222
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 1. single-cell profiling and reconstruction of the developmental trajectory (a) overview of the experimental design and the corresponding stages of embryogenesis. (b) pseudotime trajectory of 1,536 single-cell transcriptomes (points) from all stages of the eb time course. data are from two independent biological replicates. trajectory was inferred by monocle 2. cells are color coded by cell-state annotations from the analyses in (d) and (e) and figures s1d and s1f–s1h. pre-epib, preimplantation epiblast-like; post-epib, postimplantation epiblast-like; s. ect, surface ectoderm (c) pseudotime trajectory from (b), with cells from each real-time point superimposed in red. (d and e) heatmaps showing unbiased clustering of meta-modules based on differentially expressed genes from the same 1,536 single-cell transcriptomes. cells were split into two categories: early (esc to epiblast; d) or late (ps to germ layers; e). the top differentially expressed genes for each cluster are annotated (p < 1e– 5). cells were assigned ‘‘transition’’ (gray) when they did not have a clear lineage identity. cell states were assigned based on marker gene expression. see also figure s1 and table s3.']. Reference sentences:[in the absence of lif the cultures aggregated spontaneously and differentiated into ebs over 14 days (figure 1a; star methods).we used monocle 2 a graph-based machine learning approach that orders single-cell transcriptomes based on their similarity and puts out a graph of a ‘‘pseudotime course’’ (figure 1b; qiu et al. 2017).this pseudotime course can therefore be considered a quantitative measure of progress through a biological process (in this case differentiation) (figure 1c).eb differentiation recapitulates the developmental trajectory of the pre-gastrulation embryo we next compared the transcriptomes of the main populations identified in the eb differentiation course with the 2 cell reports 33 108222 october 6 2020 article ll open access figure 1.eb differentiation recapitulates the developmental trajectory of the pre-gastrulation embryo (a) plot comparing real-time point of collection (y axis) with pseudotime score (x axis) for the same 1536 single cells from figure 1 (points).cells are color coded by cell-state annotations from figure 1.(b) pseudotime trajectory as in figure 1b with a magnified view of the cells with arrested differentiation (orange dots black outline).escs are sorted into culture plates based on reporter expression (rfp bfp and e2- crimson) (as in figure 1a).lineage identity for each single cell was assigned as in figure 1 and validated using correlations to in vivo datasets (figure s5c) and using a machine learning classifier trained on data from figure 1 (figures s5a and s5b).(e) 5-aza-treated cells and dmso-treated control cells as in (d) are projected on the eb trajectory shown in figure 1b.]
the progression of cell differentiation along a developmental trajectory, inferred by single-cell transcriptomics and pseudotime analysis.

Text 305
10.1016/j.celrep.2020.108222
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 2. eb differentiation recapitulates the developmental trajectory of the pre-gastrulation embryo (a) plot comparing real-time point of collection (y axis) with pseudotime score (x axis) for the same 1,536 single cells from figure 1 (points). cells are color coded by cell-state annotations from figure 1. we identify a population of pre-epib cells with arrested differentiation (orange dots, black outline). (b) pseudotime trajectory as in figure 1b, with a magnified view of the cells with arrested differentiation (orange dots, black outline). these cells fall at the branchpoint of escs (red), pre-epib cells (orange), and post-epib cells (lime green). (c) plot showing differentially expressed genes in the cell population with arrested differentiation. the top differentially expressed genes (36 genes, àlog(p) > 5.8, fold change > 1.2) are highlighted (red). top differentially expressed genes include many pgc marker genes. we therefore annotated the population of cells with arrested differentiation as pgc like. (d) heatmap showing unbiased clustering of meta-modules based on the top 30 differentially expressed genes from the single-cell transcriptomes of cells annotated as pgc like (yellow) or pre-epib (orange). the top differentially expressed genes for each cluster are annotated (p < 1eà3). (e) heatmap showing a correlation analysis of the annotated eb cell states with gene expression data from bulk rna-seq from isolated populations in vivo (geo: gse76505; zhang et al., 2018).']. Reference sentences:[the pseudotime score for individual cells correlated well with the actual time points of collection with some notable exceptions (figure 2a).this suggested that these cells were arrested in their differentiation (figure 2a; star methods).we therefore annotated this cluster as pgc-like cells (figure 2d).cell reports 33 108222 october 6 2020 3 article ll open access figure 2.we correlated the aggregated rna profiles of our assigned cell lineages with annotated in vivo populations from prior bulk and single-cell studies (figure 2e; boroviak et al. 2015; nestorowa et al. 2016; seisenberger et al. 2012; zhang et al. 2018; star methods).next we compared eb-derived pgc- like cells with isolated embryonic tissues at various stages (bor- oviak et al. 2015; magnu´ sdo´ ttir et al. 2013; seisenberger et al. 2012; zhang et al. 2018) which suggested that eb-derived pgc-like cells share transcriptional programs with e4.5 preim- plantation epiblast cells and pgcs isolated from e11.5 embryos (figure 2f).bottom left: reproduction of the pseudotime trajectory plot from figure 2d depicting the branchpoint between pre-epib cells (orange) pgc-like cells (yellow) and post-epib cells (lime green; which become the ps dark green).]
Summary: Trajectory analysis reveals differentiation arrest in pgc-like cells, with shared gene expression patterns with pre-epib and pgc cells.

Text 306
10.1016/j.celrep.2020.108222
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 6. dna methylation drives cell fate choice in a tight developmental window (a) top: schematic representing the lineage trajectory. bottom left: reproduction of the pseudotime trajectory plot from figure 2d, depicting the branchpoint between pre-epib cells (orange), pgc-like cells (yellow), and post-epib cells (lime green; which become the ps, dark green). bottom right: plots showing average expression of the dna methylation and demethylation machinery as a function of pseudotime along each lineage branch, with 0 being the branchpoint. (b) ebs were treated with 5-aza and spontaneously differentiated to day 14. dmso control or 5-aza-treated cells are projected (red points) on the monocle 2 trajectory plot of the branchpoint from a (top). stacked bar plots depict the proportion of each lineage at each time point (bottom). lineages were assigned as in figures 1 and 5. (c) heatmap (left) showing the top upregulated genes after 5-aza treatment of ebs. the heatmap (center) shows that the same genes are downregulated during differentiation in vivo (geo: gse76505; zhang et al., 2018). another heatmap (right) shows that the promoters of the same genes become methylated during differentiation in vivo (geo: gse76505; zhang et al., 2018). (d) illustration depicting the experimental design for perturbation of dna methylation at different time points. we treated cells with 5-aza on days 0, 4, and 6 and collected ebs for single-cell transcriptomics on day 14. (e) 5-aza-treated cells and dmso-treated control cells as in (d) are projected on the eb trajectory shown in figure 1b.']. Reference sentences:[cell reports 33 108222 october 6 2020 9 article ll open access figure 6.conversely as cells progress in pseudotime toward the pgc-like lineage dna methyltransferase expression remains low whereas dna deme- thylase expression increases modestly (figure 6a).although =2% of cells in control ebs were pgc like this lineage accounted for a full =30% of cells after 5-aza treatment (figure 6b).genes significantly (t test p < 1e=3) upregulated upon 5-aza treatment in ebs tended to be repressed in the epiblast ps and mes lineages in vivo (figure 6c; zhang et al. 2018).more- over the promoters of pgc-specific (e.g. dppa3 tet1 gstm2 trdrd12 and dnmt3l) and naive pluripotency (e.g. zfp42 and nanog) genes become methylated in epiblast ps and mes lineages in vivo (figure 6c; zhang et al. 2018).we then harvested the cells on day 14 and performed scrna-seq as described above (figure 6d).we applied this classifier to our perturbation data in figure 6.]
The trajectory of cell fate choice is influenced by DNA methylation dynamics, impacting gene expression during differentiation.

Text 307
10.1016/j.neuron.2020.09.023
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 7. cell specification trajectories in the hypothalamus (a) umap visualization of hypothalamus cell types. hypothalamus cells (based on clustering analysis) from 12 hpf to 15 dpf were subsetted from the full dataset and analyzed together. cells are color coded by stage. (b) cell specification tree of zebrafish hypothalamus development. trajectories were generated by urd and visualized as a branching tree. cells are color coded by stage. 12 hpf cells were assigned as the root, and 15 dpf differentiated cells were assigned as tips. (c) expression of select genes are shown on the hypothalamus specification tree. (d) heatmap of gene expression cascade of nrgna+ cell trajectories. red, high expression. yellow, low expression. see also figures s6 and s10–s12.']. Reference sentences:[the prdx1= group further diverged into two major groups: nrgna+ and nrgna= trajectories (figures 7b and umap-2 a c b pseudotime gaba tac1+ synpr+ sst1.1+ pdyn+ prdx1+ tph2+ gaba dlx+ d sp8a pbx3b dlx2b dlx1a hmx3a nkx2.2a nkx2.4a isl1 dlx5a rgs5b precursors gaba tac1+ synpr+ umap-1 prdx1+ pdyn+ tph2+ synpr+ sst1.1+ gaba tac1+ gaba dlx+ figure 7.the nrgna+ branch segregated into gabaergic tac1+ syn- pr= subtype; and gabaergic tac1+ synpr+ positive subtype (figure 7d).]
Summary: Trajectories of cell specification in hypothalamus development, including gene expression cascade of nrgna+ cells.

Text 308
10.1016/j.neuron.2020.09.023
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 6. cell specification trajectories in the retina (a) umap visualization of retinal cell types. retinal cells (based on clustering analysis) from 12 hpf to 15 dpf were subsetted from the full dataset and analyzed together. cells are color coded by stage. (b) cell specification tree of zebrafish retinal development. trajectories were generated by urd and visualized as a branching tree. cells are color coded by stage. 12 hpf cells were assigned as the root, and 15 dpf differentiated cells were assigned as tips. cbp, cone bipolar cells (6 subtypes are numbered); rgc, retinal ganglion cells; rpe, retinal pigment epithelium (c) expression of select genes are shown on the retina specification tree. (d) heatmaps of gene expression cascades of photoreceptor cell trajectories and retinal ganglion cell trajectories. cells were selected based on high expression along trajectories leading to these cell types, compared to expression along opposing branchpoints. red, high expression. yellow, low expression see also figures s5–s9.']. Reference sentences:[similarly known regulators of precursors rgcs cones rods umap-1 umap-2 12h 14h 16h 18h 20h 24h 36h 2d 3d 5d 8d 15d 12h 14h 16h 18h 20h 24h 36h 2d 3d 5d 8d 15d cones rods amacrine_1 rgc horizontal muller glia rpe amacrine_2 cbp_3 cbp_6 cbp_5 cbp_2 cbp_1 cbp_4 a b pseudotime c d pou4f1 rbpms2a sox6 rbpms2b pou4f2 irx4a sox11a sox11b prdm1a nr2e3 six7 apln nr2f1b crx isl2a aplnra otx5 aplnrb rpe muller glia kidins220a+ rgc amacrine cone bipolar cones rods horizontal figure 6.simi- larly in our transcriptional trajectories (figure 6b) the muller glia expression program is the earliest non-epithelial retinal program to diverge commencing with the expression of several her-family transcription factors (her4 her12 and her15) then proceeding through a cascade of intermediate overlapping expression states such as onset of fabp7a s100a10b and later connexin genes that are characteristic of muller glia fate (fig- ure s8).]
Summary: Trajectories of retinal cell development from precursor to differentiated cells, shown by gene expression patterns along branching tree.

Text 309
10.1038/s41467-020-19012-4
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 6 differentiation trajectories and tf dynamics of the pit-1 lineage. a venn diagram of progenitor cells distributed in each pit1 sublineage as shown in the pseudotime analysis. pro.pit1_all: the common progenitor cells of all three sublineages; pre.thy, the precursor cells of thyrotropes; pre,som: the potential precursor cells of somatotropes. b distribution of the subtypes of the pro.pit1 on the umap plot. dots: single cells; colors: weeks postfertilization (left) or cell types (right). c violin and inside box plots showing the gene expression dynamics of known tfs for each pit1 lineage. #p > 0.1, p < 0.01 p < 0.001. p-values are determined by two-sided wilcoxon test and adjusted by bonferroni correction. d venn diagram showing the intersections among the differentially expressed tfs between any two of the three pit1 lineages, and the 13 tfs that were significantly upregulated in the pro.pit1_all cells in comparison with the stem cells, for which the names of genes are shown. e violin with inside box plots showing representative identified tfs for each pit1 lineage. f heatmap showing the relative expression levels of the significantly upregulated tfs of thyrotropes along the pseudotime axis. colors: loess-smoothed expression (red, high; blue, low). the columns represent cells being ordered along the pseudotime axis, and cell type information is shown above the heatmap. rows represent genes being ordered by their peak expression along the pseudotime axis. g the scatterplot (left) expression and immunoﬂuorescence staining of nkx2-2 as a somatotrope-specific tf. scale bar, 50μm. arrows indicate representative cells co-expressing gh and nkx2-2.']. Reference sentences:[in addition to these three hormone producing cell types the pseudotime trajectories analysis identified three inter- mediated progenitor or precursor cell populations: the pro.pit1_all cells as a common progenitor for all three hormone producing cell types (146 cells) the pre.thy as a precursor for the thyrotrope (74 cells gata2-positive) and the pre.som as a potential precursor for the somatotrope (19 cells fig 6a b).to explore how three different lineages segregate from the common progenitor cell state we first investigated expression dynamics of known lineage-enriched genes (fig 6c).notably we found that neurod4 was clearly activated in pro.pit1_all cells in comparison with the stem cells (logfc = 1.6 p = 1.3e–18 fig 6c).notably its expression level was significantly upregulated in the pro.pit1_all cells in comparison with the stem cells (logfc = 0.6 p = 9.8e–08) and the level was similar between the pro.pit1_all cells and the lactotropes (p > 0.1 fig 6c).inter- estingly sox11 a member of soxc family genes with sox4 was significantly upregulated in the pro.pit1_all cells in comparison with the stem cells (logfc = 1.0 p = 4.2e-12 fig 6d).then we investigated a comprehensive view of lineage- enriched genes and identified a total of 1277 degs including 107 tfs between any two of three lineages (logfc ≥ 0.5 and adjusted p ≤ 0.01 fig 6d supplementary fig 5a b and supplementary data 5).among these tf remarkably neurod4 and zbtb20 were identified as the primary lineage-enriched tfs for the somato- tropes and the lactotropes respectively (fig 6c d).rxrg and dach1 were identified as two thyrotrope-enriched genes both of which were prominently upregulated in the pro.pit1_all cells and kept the high expression levels in the thyrotropes while down- regulated in the somatotropes and the lactotropes (fig 6c d).nkx2-2 which has been shown to be essential for development of neuroendocrine gastro- intestinal tract and pancreas43 was specifically upregulated in a portion of terminal somatotropes (fig 6g) and it is highly expressed in the human adult pituitary in the gtex database.we validated the coexpression of nkx2-2 with gh by immunoﬂuorescence (fig 6g).six6) and 38 thyrotrope-enriched (e.g. gata2 isl1 and foxl2) were upregulated during the differentiation of the lactotropes and the thyrotropes respectively (fig 6d e).the pseudotime analysis of thyrotrope-lineage differentiation showed that expression of sox4 and sox11 peaked before activation of gata2 in the pre.thy cells (fig 6f).among all five clusters gonadotrope2 had the most degs and comparing between gonadotrope2 and gonadotrope4 identified 265 and 30 degs respectively (fig 7c supplementary fig 6 and supplementary data 6).other degs included hif3a and mc2r in the type i trajectory and folate receptor folr1 and secretoglobin scgb2a1 in the type ii trajectory (fig 7d and supplementary fig 6).we found that two soxc family genes sox4 and sox11 were prominently expressed in the pro.pit1_all cells before activation of gata2 and gata3 in the pre.thy (fig 6f) suggesting that the sox genes play roles in thyrotrope commit- ment by regulating the gata genes as sox4b does in zebrafish; these two soxc genes may act redundantly as in other develop- mental processes51.in venn diagram of fig 6d tfs were selected from significantly upregulated degs (p_val_adj ≤ 0.01 and avg_logfc ≥ 0.5) between each two of lineages.]
Summary: Trajectory analysis reveals differentiation patterns of pit-1 lineage cells, including common progenitors and lineage-specific gene expression dynamics.

Text 310
10.1038/s41467-020-19012-4
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 7 two developmental trajectories of gonadotropes. a umap plots (left) showing that gonadotropes are comprised of two sublineages with scatterplots (right) showing the expression patterns of representative marker genes. dots: single cells; colors: cell types (upper) or weeks postfertilization (lower). gray to red indicate no to high expression levels. b rna velocity analysis of gonadotropes projected onto the umap plot showing two sublineages. dots: single cells; colors: cell types; arrows: predicted directions of the pseudotime. c volcano plots (left) of degs between gonadotrope2 and gonadotrope4, with bar plots (right) showing go terms enriched in each subtype. colored dots indicate significant degs in each subtype. p-values are determined by two-sided wilcoxon test and adjusted by bonferroni correction. d violin with inside box plots showing representative degs of two sublineages. e diagram of the development of human fetal anterior pituitary. for a given stage, representative enriched tfs are highlighted. the pre.som is labeled with a question mark as this intermediated substate is supported by sufficient number of cells.']. Reference sentences:[the pseudotime and reclustering analyses interestingly identified five subclusters (fig 7a).the pseudotime analysis revealed two developmental trajec- tories: one trajectory was from the pre.gonado to the gonado- trope1 and terminated at the gonadotrope2 (type i trajectory) while the other trajectory was from the pre.gonado to the gonadotrope3 and gonadotrope4 (type ii trajectory fig 7a b).among all five clusters gonadotrope2 had the most degs and comparing between gonadotrope2 and gonadotrope4 identified 265 and 30 degs respectively (fig 7c supplementary fig 6 and supplementary data 6).the steroidogenic enzyme cyp11a1) suggesting that gonadotrope2 actively secreted hormones (fig 7c).wnt4 and gata2 were more highly expressed in gonadotrope2 and gonadotrope4 respectively (fig 7d).other degs included hif3a and mc2r in the type i trajectory and folate receptor folr1 and secretoglobin scgb2a1 in the type ii trajectory (fig 7d and supplementary fig 6).the human scrna-seq data which used a plate-based method recovered higher number of genes per cell comparing with the rodent data using the droplet-based 10x genomic method (sup- plementary fig 7a).anterior pituitary known markers and new markers including sox2 pomc gh1 prl tshb gnrhr aldh1a2 nr3c1 dlk1 olfm1 dio2 and kcnk3 showed similar cell- type-specific expression patterns (fig 8b supplementary fig 7b).it is noteworthy that the coexpression of the epithelial and mesenchymal markers is also detected in mouse adult stem cells and rat fscs (supplementary fig 7b).the resolution of “findclusters” was set as 1 for all cells and merged subclusters of mc with the same known markers (supplementary fig 1d f) 1.5 for endocrine cells and merged subclusters of stem somatotrope and gonadotrope with the same known markers (fig 1b c) 0.3 for stem cells (fig 2c) 0.4 for gonadotropes (fig 7a).for fig 7a the start cluster was set as pre.gonado.]
Summary: Identification of two developmental trajectories in gonadotropes based on gene expression patterns and pseudotime analysis.

Text 311
10.1038/s41590-020-0799-x
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 7 | revised model of hematopoiesis. dach1 expression separates lymphoid fate within lmpps. lpps, which are a dach1− subfraction of lmpps, give rise to il-7r+ clps en route to generation of lymphocytes. by contrast, dach1+ lmpps may consist of (1) a potential immediate stage before cmp/gmp intermediates for myeloid cell production (lmpp box, right) and/or (2) some progenitors, presumably earlier in a developmental trajectory, which can also give rise to lymphoid cells at later times (lmpp box, left) and remain to be determined.']. Reference sentences:[given recent revised models of hematopoiesis1131–34 this is likely to be an oversimplifica- tion but at least allows for demarcation of downstream lymphoid from myeloid fate in lmpps (fig 7).]
Summary: Identification of lymphoid and myeloid fate trajectories within LMPPs based on Dach1 expression.

Text 312
10.1161/ATVBAHA.120.314789
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 5. verification and mechanism of endothelial mesenchymal transition (endo-mt) involved in calcific aortic valve disease (cavd) process. a, in vivo colocalization of valve interstitial cell and valve endothelial cell (vec) with fluorescence in situ hybridization (fish) and immunofluorescent staining (ab), arrows indicate positive double-stained cells (magnification in the insets), dash line indicates endothelium of the aortic valve, bar: 100 μm. b, immunofluorescent staining of culturing of vec verifying endo-mt in vitro. c and d, western blotting for verifying endo-mt of vecs cultured within 0 and 12 days. p<0.05. the figure demonstrates a significant difference. e and f, volcano plot with the differentially expressed genes of bulk and vec culture. values of fold change (fc: log2) >1 and q value (−log10) >3 were accepted as significance; up: red; down: green. g and h, venn of differentially expressed genes (degs) from vec cultured endo-mt (cell cultured degs), pseudotime differentiation trajectory of cluster 7, 10, 11, 12,13 (clusters degs) and aortic valve tissue of healthy and cavd samples (bulk degs). h, common 16 degs expression heatmap of clusters degs, (i) top 5 significant degs: c11orf96, col1a1, ifi27, hes4, cnn1. j and k, the above top 5 degs were verified in cell culture and bulk degs with expression heatmap. l, qpcr verification of the above top 5 degs in cells (0 vs 12 d) and tissues (healthy vs cavd), n=3 (p<0.05) showed significant differences between groups. m, pathway enrichment bubble map of kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes (kegg) pathway enrichment analysis, ecm-receptor interaction (ko04512), focal adhesion (ko04510), and pi3k-akt signaling pathway (ko04151) were highly enriched. a larger p value (−log10) indicates a higher degree of enrichment. p<0.01 was accepted for the cutoff for significance. n.s indicates nonsignificance.']. Reference sentences:[in addition sele+/sparc+ cells tended to migrate from the endothelial zone to the interstitial zone (figure 5a).doi: 10.1161/atvbaha.120.314789 cd31+/col1+ sele+/col3+ sele+/sparc+ coexpressed transitive state cells in the vec culturing as mesenchymal cells (figure 5b and figure xk in the data supplement).the results revealed that the expression levels of vec-associated endothelial marker ve-cadherin were significantly suppressed by endo-mt induction whereas the expression of mesenchymal cell markers col1a and periostin were significantly induced (figure 5c and 5d).in addition rna sequencing of vecs cultured at 0 and 12 days (figure xiii in the data supplement) revealed endo-mt transformation depending on the identified degs (cell culture degs) with 640 upregu- lations (col1a1 cnn1) and 195 downregulations (cdh6; figure 5f).when combined with bulk degs cell culture degs and the top 1000 degs of cluster 7 10 13 11 12 (cluster degs) in the venn diagram (figure 5g) 16 common degs highlighted the top 5 significant genes: c11orf96 col1a1 ifi27 hes4 and cnn1 (figure 5h) fluctuating in vic to vec pseudotime differentiation (cluster 11 via 12–7 13 10; figure 5i).the above 5 notable genes showed higher expression in the transformed vecs (12 days; figure 5j) and cavd samples (figure 5k) suggesting its potential role in regulating endo-mt.pathway enrichment showed that ecm-receptor interaction (ko04512) focal adhesion (ko04510) and pi3k-akt signaling pathway (ko04151) were highly associated with endo-mt during the cavd calcification process (figure 5m).further verification of the above 5 gene expression revealed that c11orf96 col1a1 ifi27 hes4 and cnn1 were expressed higher in transformed vecs (12 days) versus primary vecs (0 day) and were expressed higher in cavd versus healthy samples (figure 5k and 5l).]
Patterns related to trajectory include transition from endothelial to mesenchymal state, differential gene expression, and pathway enrichment in calcific aortic valve disease.

Text 313
10.1161/ATVBAHA.120.314789
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 4. pseudotime differentiation trajectory indicates endothelial mesenchymal transition (endo-mt) in calcific aortic valve disease (cavd) process. a, pseudotime trajectory based on all 34632 cells. it is shown in a gradient from dark to light blue which indicates the time increment (0–12.5). five potential differential branched points are shown by arrows. reconstruction of differentiation and relation of cell states to all 14 clusters is demonstrated. monocle-generated pseudotime trajectory of all 34632 cells with gene expression profiles is shown colored by 11 states designation. the map of all clusters to the 11 developmental stages (states) according to the fitted expressed genes indicates that different clusters are assigned to different periods. b, pseudotime trajectory/state/cluster analysis of cluster 7, 10, 11, 12, and 13 indicating endomt of valve endothelial cells (vecs) to valve interstitial cells (vics). c, the top 5 pathway enrichments in each cluster involved in endo-mt from pseudotime trajectory analysis is shown. d, endo-mt associated pathways enriched in each cluster is demonstrated from pseudotime trajectory analysis. e and f, vec and vic selected markers. e, top 5 expressed genes (fold change) is shown as markers of cluster 7, 10, 11, 12, 13. f, expression heatmap of selected markers in t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding projection of all cells is presented. g, immunofluorescent staining of cavd aortic valve tissue with sele, il1rl1, sparc antibodies is shown; red and green arrows indicate positive staining; white arrow indicates negative staining, dash line indicates endothelial layer.']. Reference sentences:[doi: 10.1161/atvbaha.120.314789 december 2020 7 the top 1000 differentially expressed genes across all cell types based on cell trajectory state it was determined that the cells matched 11 developmental states with 5 potential differential branched points (figure 4a; figure v in the data supplement).because the healthy aortic valve specimens primarily contained 2 cell types vics and vecs we speculated figure 4.a pseudotime subset of vec clusters 11 and 12 and vic clusters 7 10 and 13 showed 11 differentiation states in the 5 cell populations (figure 4b).cluster 11 was at the beginning of the differentiation state clus- ter 10 was at the end of the differentiation state and clusters 7 and 12 were scattered in the transition state (figure 4b).pathway enrichment revealed that endo-mt was highly related to age-rage signaling seen path- way in diabetic complications (ko04933) and pi3k- akt signaling pathway (ko04151; figure 4c and 4d).we screened 3 representative markers: sele il1rl1 sparc for experimental verification (figure 4e).accord- ing to the previous tsne projection for the cell clusters il1rl1 was expressed only in cluster 11 whereas sele was expressed in both clusters 11 and 12 (figure 4f).the expression of sparc in the interstitial layer was remarkable (figure 4g) indirectly verifying the presence of a cluster of transitional cells (cluster 12).]
Patterns related to differentiation trajectory and endo-mt transition in single-cell populations across 11 developmental states with 5 potential branched points.

Text 314
10.1126/sciadv.aba5536
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 3. real-time monitoring of the leukemia–niche cell interaction dynamics. (a) dynamic migration of niche cells (ecs) toward leukemia cells during 3-day culture. the result was extracted from one representative image within three experimental replicates. scale bar, 1cm. (b) evolving dynamics of the murine leukemic bm niche during 3-day culture. the intercellular distances between leukemia and niche cells were manually quantified (n>50) from three experimental replicates. the bin size at 5 was set for the histogram. (c) clustering behavior of b-all cells cultured with or without niche cells. the b-all clusters (defined with at least 20 cells) were manually quantified from three experimental replicates. unpaired t test (p<0.01, mann-\\xad whitney test). (d) the migration trajectory of individual b-all cells (n=60) was recorded every 5min over a period of 4 hours by time-lapse microscopy. in the flower plot diagram, the starting point of each track is placed at the axis origin. data are representative of three individual experiments. (e) average migration velocity (f06dm/min) of b-all cells of the indicated conditions analyzed in (d). unpaired t test (n.s., not significant; p<0.01).']. Reference sentences:[we found that b-all cells attracted ecs during the 3-day culture as indicated by the presence of ecs in the central area (fig 3a).in addition we quantified the intercellular distance between b-all and niche cells during coculture and the results demonstrated that b-all and niche cells dynamically colocalized (fig 3b).we further observed an enhanced clustering of b-all cells around niche cells compared to the b-all monoculture condition indicating that niche cells may provide additional adhesive sites to facilitate b-all clustering (fig 3c).time-lapse migration analysis of b-all cells revealed that leukemic cells either cultured in the presence or absence of niche cells were comparably motile at the culture onset (day 0) whereas after a two- day culture leukemia blasts cocultured with niche cells were less motile as compared to those cultured in the absence of niche cells (fig 3 d and e) suggesting the temporally evolved features in chemo- tactic and adhesive signaling among b-all blasts and niche cells.this indicates that cxcl12 may function in the early stage of leu- kemia progression such as induction of leukemia migration (fig 3 d and e).we also observed that leukemic blasts physically cluster around niche cells indicating that niche cells may provide unique adhesion sites for engrafting b-all cells (fig 3c).hsc retention within the bm microenvironment is mediated by vla-4/vcam-1 signaling; similarly leukemic blasts have been shown to engage perivascular fig 3.]
The migration trajectory of individual cells in the presence or absence of niche cells was analyzed, showing dynamic interactions and clustering behavior.

Text 315
10.1126/sciadv.abd2068
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 3. dual switch fate mapping to reveal identity of mixed expression cell types. (a) intersectional (dual switch) genetic fate mapping strategy for invivo labeling of cell types. the flpe-conditional cre construct used either fapb7, or slc1a3, or hes1 promoters. (b) iue to label cells coexpressing eomes and fabp7 at e14.5 with 15-hour survival. proportion of each morphological cell type represented in pie chart. eomes+ brgcs (1) and sox2+ argcs (2) were present. (c) iue to label cells coexpressing eomes and fabp7 at e14.5 with 24-hour survival. proportion of each morphological cell type represented in the pie chart. transfectants include eomes+ brgcs (1 and 2) and sox2+/eomes− argcs (3). (d) iue to label cells coexpressing eomes and hes1 at e14.5 with 24-hour survival, demonstrating that brgcs and their daughter cells express sox2. (e) iue to label cells coexpressing eomes and hes1 at e14.5 with 24-hour survival, demonstrating expression of sox2in argc and brgc (white arrowheads) but not bipcs (white arrows). (f to i) pseudotime trajectories of mipc1 (f), mipc2 (g), mipc3 (h), and mipc5 (i). color indicates pseudotime progression. cell states are indicated with circled roman numerals. genes showing strong association with pseudotime and cell states are shown at the bottom of each panel. (j) violin plot of canonical marker genes for rgcs and ipcs expressed by mipcs. colors represent different genes. vertical axis shows normalized gene expression levels. scale bars, 20 mm.']. Reference sentences:[to this end we designed an intersectional approach combining flp recombinase (flpe) driven by the eomes promoter an flpe conditional plasmid expressing cre under the control of one of the apical marker genes (e.g. hes1 slc1a3 or fabp7) and a cre-conditional egfp reporter (fig 3a).fifteen hours following iue with these intersectional fate mapping plasmids at e14.5 most of the labeled cells resembled argcs and expressed sox2 protein (fig 3 b and b2) demonstrating the presence of a subpopulation of argcs expressing the eomes transcript as pre- dicted by the expression profile of the mrgc2 cluster.in addition a few cells with brgc morphology were also present among the gfp-labeled cohort and these brgcs expressed eomes protein (fig 3b1) as well as sox2 (fig 3 d and e).by 24 hours elapsed time the sox2+/eomes− argcs in the vz were joined by a much larger sox2+/eomes+ brgc population in the subventricular zone (svz) (fig 3 c c1 c2 and c3) consistent with the contempora- neous expression of argc and ipc genes (including eomes) in mipc1 (fig s6a).many of the cells with brgc morphology were located adjacent to a second egfp+ cell suggestive of a recent cell division and the generation of a daughter cell within the 24-hour period fig 3 (d and e).in addition to mipc1 our bioinformatics analysis also revealed other ipc groups with mixed apical and basal gene expression (fig 3 f to i).specifically mipc3 strongly expressed both eomes and apical markers like fabp7 but was further defined by the ex- pression of neurod4 (fig 3j).to determine whether the neurod4+ brgcs are the same population of brgcs found in the eomes/vz gene intersectional cohort in fig 3 we quantified the proportion of pneurod4-cre–expressing brgcs in the total brgc population.through this process we were able to establish four well-separated streams emanating from the precursor cell types fig 3.]
Summary: Trajectory analysis reveals pseudotime progression of different cell states based on gene expression patterns.

Text 316
10.1126/sciadv.abd2068
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 2. dynamic cell states are present among mouse radial glia cells. (a and b) pseudotime trajectory of mrgc1 (a) and mrgc2 (b). color indicates pseudotime progression. cell states are indicated with circled roman numerals. genes showing strong association with pseudotime, and cell states are shown at the bottom of each panel. (c) boxplot of eomes expression levels in each cell state (circled roman numerals) of mrgc cell types. asterisks indicate statistical significance (fisher’s exact test) compared with any other cell state. (d) eomes-cre iue-based fate mapping demonstrates multiple cell morphotypes including argcs, bipcs, and brgcs. (e) iue of eomes-c\\xad re with dual-color stoplight reporter using ph3 to isolate mitotic cells. a subpopulation of eomes-cre–expressing cells divides at the vz surface while non–tbr2-cre–expressing cells primarily divide at the vz surface. (f) location of ph3+ divisions by eomes-cre fate map lineage. (g) proportion of precursors dividing at the surface of the lateral ventricle or subapically differs by lineage; 36.7% of mitotic cells expressing eomes-cre divide at the ventricular surface. mann-whitney u test, n=3, p<0.001. (h to j) cells with argc morphology expressing eomes-cre plasmid do not express eomes protein. (k and l) precursors expressing eomes-cre plasmid express eomes mrna. scale bars, 20 mm.']. Reference sentences:[we identified three states in mrgc1 that were related to cc progression (fig 2a and fig s4e) demonstrated by gene ex- pression patterns of cc-related genes along pseudotime (fig s4f).however in mrgc2 we found four states that appeared to reflect distinctive lineage commitments as evidenced by the expression of lineage-selective marker genes (fig 2b).in particular state ii in mrgc2 was enriched for eomes expression as compared with all other states in both mrgc1 and mrgc2 (fig 2c).twenty-four hours later this labeling method elucidated multiple classes of progenitors expressing the eomes promoter construct identified by morphological and anatomical properties as argcs aipcs bipcs and brgcs (fig 2d) (22).2020; 6 : eabd2068 6 november 2020 scie n c e a d v a nces | resea r ch a rt icl e 4 of 15 confirm expression of eomes by argcs we next electroporated e13.5 brains with peomes-cre and a conditional dual-color stoplight plasmid that expresses mcherry after cre-mediated recombination (fig 2e) followed 24 hours later by immunohistochemical labeling for phosphorylated histone h3 a marker for mitotic cells.in contrast and in agreement with the canonical view of eomes expression by basal progenitors most (63.3%) peomes-cre (mcherry)–expressing cells divided at basal fig 2.2020; 6 : eabd2068 6 november 2020 scie n c e a d v a nces | resea r ch a rt icl e 5 of 15 positions away from the ventricle (fig 2 f and g).to confirm that the peomes-cre plasmid faithfully reports endog- enous eomes expression we used single molecular fluorescent rna in situ hybridization and detected eomes mrna in cells transfected with peomes-cre and a cre-conditional enhanced gfp (egfp) re- porter plasmid (fig 2 h and i).however immunolabeling using an antibody against the eomes protein failed to detect expression of eomes in the egfp-expressing argcs (fig 2 j to l).because the peomes-cre fate mapping approach labeled multi- ple morphotypes (fig 2d) we hypothesized that an in vivo approach restricting labeling to cells that coexpress both eomes and apical marker genes such as hes1 fabp7 or slc1a3 could specifically high- light the cells with mixed identity including those within the mrgc2 and mipc1 profiles.ridge plots as in fig 2c and 3b were generated with ggridges package.]
Patterns of cell states and lineage commitments along a trajectory in mouse radial glia cells, with specific gene expressions marking distinct states and lineages.

Text 317
10.1038/s41586-020-2941-1
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 2 | origin of myofibroblasts in the human kidney. a, umap embedding of 37,800 pdgfrβ+ single cells from 8 human kidneys. labels refer to identified cell types by unsupervised clustering (see supplementary data 1). b, expression of selected genes on the embedding in a. c, diffusion map embedding of pdgfrβ+ fibroblasts (fib), myofibroblasts (mf) and pericytes (n = 23,883) and the expression of selected genes on the same embedding. red lines correspond to the three lineage trajectories (lineage 1 (l1), l2 and l3) predicted by slingshot given the diffusion map coordinates and the clusters depicted in extended data fig 5b. d, representative images and quantification of rna ish for meg3,']. Reference sentences:[next we profiled 33690 cd10+ proximal tubular cells (5 patients with egfr > 60 and 3 with egfr < 60) and arranged these into 7 clusters (fig 1e extended data fig 2e–j).cell-cycle analysis indi- cated increased cycling in ckd probably reflecting epithelial repair (extended data fig 2k l).analysis of kegg pathway and gene ontology (go) terms in cd10+ cells suggested increased fatty acid metabolism in ckd (fig 1f extended data fig 2m n).origin of extracellular matrix in human ckd to identify the cell types that contribute to the production of ecm in kidney fibrosis we established a single-cell ecm expression score that included collagens glycoproteins and proteoglycans7 and confirmed an increased score in published ckd data8 (extended data fig 2o–u).mesenchymal cells exhibited the highest ecm expression and this increased further in ckd (fig 1h i extended data fig 2q–u).g cd10− clustering by ecm score stratified by egfr (see extended data fig 2p).unsupervised clustering of 37380 pdgfrβ+ cells sorted from human kidneys (n = 4; egfr > 60 and n = 4; egfr < 60) (supplementary table 1) identified mesenchymal pop- ulations and some epithelial endothelial and immune cells which were annotated by correlation with the cd10− populations (fig 2a b extended data fig 4a–e).some macrophage monocyte endothelial and injured epithelial popu- lations also expressed col1α1 and pdgfrβ but at much lower levels (fig 2a b extended data fig 4f–i).pseudotime trajectory and diffusion map analysis of major ecm-expressing cells from the pdgfrβ+ populations indicated three main sources of myofibroblasts in human kidneys: (1) notch3+ rgs5+pdgfrα− pericytes; (2) meg3+pdgfrα+ fibroblasts; and (3) colec11+cxcl12+ fibroblasts (fig 2c extended data fig 5a).diffusion mapping places non-ckd cells within populations of low ecm-expressing pericytes and fibroblasts indicating a differentia- tion trajectory from low-ecm non-ckd pericytes and fibroblasts to high-ecm ckd myofibroblasts (fig 2c extended data fig 5a–i).we confirmed this directionality and also the main lineages of the dif- fusion map consisting of notch3+ pericytes (lineage 1) and meg3+ fibroblasts (lineage 2) using ish in human kidneys (fig 2d extended data fig 5j–m).we observed a potential intermediate stage of cells that co-expressed notch3 meg3 and postn possibly representing differentiating cells in the centre of the diffusion map (fig 2d extended data fig 5k–m).the gene expression program of pericyte-to-myofibroblast differ- entiation (lineage 1) demonstrated changes in the cell cycle consistent with differentiation and expansion (fig 2e).ordering their pathway enrichment along pseudotime yielded early canonical wnt and acti- vator protein-1 (ap-1) intermediate atf2 pdgfra and late integrin ecm receptor interaction and tgfβ signalling among other pathways (fig 2e bottom extended data fig 6a).late tgfβ signalling was prevalent in the analysis of lineages 1 and 3 (fig 2e extended data fig 6a g).we did not detect undifferentiated pericytes in this data because pericytes are pdgfrα− in humans and mice (fig 2c extended data fig 7e).in our human data the myofibroblast 1 subset corresponded to terminally differenti- ated myofibroblasts with the highest ecm expression preceded in differentiation pseudotime by myofibroblast 2 (ogn+) whereas the fibroblast 1 cells appeared as a ‘progenitor’ non-activated fibroblast population (fig 2c).the myofibroblast 2 subset (ogn+col14a1+) might exist in healthy mouse kidneys or may arise as an intermediate state via pericyte-to-myofibroblast differentiation (fig 2c human data).c scaled gene expression of nkd2 correlating or anti-correlating genes in human pdgfrβ+ cells (fig 2).step three: we integrated three single cell maps for: (1) cd10+ cells (proximal tubule; fig 1) (2) cd10− cells (proximal tubule-depleted; fig 1) and (3) pdgfrβ+ cells (mesenchymal; fig 2) by combining single-cell expression (umi counts) and clustering information from all main cell type individual maps of each data set from step two.gene clusters and expression heat maps (for example fig 2f top) were produced by ordering cells along the pseudotime predicted by slingshot and using the genesorter function plotmarkerheat.also see extended data fig 2g–u.gene expression heat maps scaled gene expression heat maps such as those in fig 2d were pro- duced using the plotmarkerheat and plottopmarkerheat functions in the genesorter r package50.article extended data fig 2 | see next page for caption.extended data fig 2 | expression of cell type markers and ecm score.a patient samples (n = 8) visualized on the umap from fig 2a.e correlation between cell clusters identified in cd10− data (fig 1 columns) and pdgfrβ+ data (fig 2 rows).a the mesenchymal cell clusters in fig 2 here indicated on the diffusion map embedding from fig 2c (left) and stratified by egfr class (right) and the expression of selected genes on the same embedding.b umap embedding of mesenchymal cell populations from fig 2a.colours represent the cell types/ states shown in fig 2a.c ecm score visualized on the umap in b. umap embedding indicates distinct and separate pericyte and fibroblast origins for myofibroblasts consistent with diffusion map embedding of the same cells (fig 2e).e pseudotime as predicted by the slingshot algorithm on the same umap embedding from b. f g col1α1 and notch3 expression on the umap embedding from b. h i violin plots across mesenchymal cells types of col1a1 and postn of human pdgfrβ+ dataset in fig 2. j quantification of meg− (notch3−postn−) cells in human kidneys (n = 35) (see patient data in supplementary table 2).a kegg pathway enrichment analysis along pseudotime for lineage 1 (see fig 2c.)b top gene expression dynamics along pseudotime for lineage 2 (fibroblasts to myofibroblasts see fig 2c).c as in b but for lineage 3 cells (see fig 2c).d pid signalling pathway enrichment analysis along pseudotime for lineage 2 cells ordered along pseudotime as in b. e kegg pathway enrichment analysis along pseudotime for lineage 2. f as in d. but for lineage 3 cells (see fig 2c).h–k violin plots across mesenchymal cells types of selected genes of the human pdgfrβ+ dataset in fig 2. l transcription factor scores for proximal promoter regions (l) and distal regions (m) obtained by transcription factors equence motif enrichment analysis for top marker genes for the mesenchymal cell clusters of the human pdgfrβ+ dataset (methods).bonferroni corrected p values based on a two-sided wilcoxon rank sum test in supplementary data 4. d umap embedding of meg3 as in fig 2a and multiplex in-situ staining of meg3 on human kidney tissue.]
Summary: Identification of three lineage trajectories of myofibroblasts in human kidneys based on diffusion map analysis.

Text 318
10.1126/science.aba7721
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 4. identification and characterization of blood cell subtypes and developmental trajectories. (a and b) umap visualization and marker-based annotation of blood cell types colored by organ type (a) and cell type (b). (c) umap visualization of blood cells, integrating across all profiled organs of this study and an scrna-seq atlas of blood cells from human fetal liver (108). cells from (108) are colored in light gray, and cells from our study are colored by tissue of origin (left) or blood cell types (right). black arrows indicate inferred cell state transition directions from hspcs to all main blood lineages. (d) dot plot showing expression of two selected marker genes per cell type. the size of the dot encodes the percentage of cells within a cell type in which that marker was detected, and its color encodes the average expression level. (e) bar plot showing the estimated fraction of cells per organ derived from each of the 17 annotated blood cell types.']. Reference sentences:[we then performed louvain clustering and further annotated fine-grained blood cell types in some cases identifying very rare cell types (fig 4b).from this we observed that t cells specifi- cally expressed cd8b and cd5 (114) as ex- pected but also tenm1 (fig 4d and fig s14c).ilc 3 cells whose annotation was determined on the basis of their expression of rorc (115) and kit (116) were more specifically marked by sorcs1 and jmy (fig 4d and fig s14c).the tissue distribu- tion of ilc 3 cells as well as subtypes of den- dritic cells was captured as well (fig 4e and fig s14d).(a) zoomed view of the erythropoiesis trajectory portion of fig 4b colored by erythroid or megakaryocyte subtype.(right) human cells are colored according to annotations from fig 4b.]
Identification and characterization of cell subtypes and developmental paths, showing cell state transitions and marker gene expressions across different cell types.

Text 319
10.1126/science.aba7721
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 5. identification and characterization of erythropoiesis and macrophage differentiation in adrenal gland. (a) zoomed view of the erythropoiesis trajectory portion of fig 4b, colored by erythroid or megakaryocyte subtype. black arrows show trajectory directionalities defined by (123). (b) plots similar to (a), colored by the normalized expression of cell type–specific genes (fdr of 0.05 and more than twofold expression difference between first and second ranked cell type), with the number of cell type–specific genes used and names of the top few genes shown. umi counts for these genes are scaled for library size, log-transformed, aggregated, and then mapped to z scores. (c) point and box plot showing the proportion of blood cells that are eeps for individual samples of different organs. samples with low recovery of blood cells (≤200) are excluded. (d) representative fluorescence microscopy of human fetal adrenal tissue, staining for endothelium (cd34+) and erythroblasts (nucleated and gypa+); nuclei stained with blue dapi.']. Reference sentences:[focusing on erythropoiesis we observed a continuous trajectory from hspcs to an in- termediate cell type erythroid-basophil- megakaryocyte biased progenitors (ebmps) which then split into erythroid basophilic and megakaryocytic trajectories (fig 5a and table s8) consistent with a recent study of the mouse fetal liver (123 124).with unsupervised clustering and adopting terminology from that study (123) we further partitioned the continuum of ery- throid states into three stages: early erythroid progenitors (eeps) (marked by slc16a9 and fam178b) committed erythroid progenitors (ceps) (marked by kif18b and kif15) and cells in the erythroid terminal differentiation state (etds) (marked by tmcc2 and hbb) (fig 5b).early and late stages of megakaryocytic cells were also readily identified (fig 5 a and b).notably we also observed eeps ceps and megakaryocyte progenitors in the adrenal gland in every sample studied (fig 5c and fig s16a).immunohistochemical analysis of human fetal adrenal tissues showed nucleated gypa+ cells outside cd34+ blood vessels (fig 5d and fig s16b).approximately 8% of viable disso- ciated cells from the adrenal gland consisted of maturing erythroblasts compared with 0.2% of viable dissociated cells in the kidney (fig 5e).also consistent with the adrenal gland being a site of ongoing erythropoiesis its distribution of immature to mature erythro- blasts matched closely with that of the bone marrow of adult mice (fig 5 e and f).we collated all macrophages together with microglia from the brain and subjected them to umap visualization and louvain clus- tering independent of other cell types (fig 5 g and h; fig s16c; and table s9).differential gene expression analysis identi- fied 700 markers that are specifically expressed cao et al. science 370 eaba7721 (2020) 13 november 2020 8 of 17 fig 5.we observed three smooth cell differentiation trajectories from a common progenitor to microglia in the brain phagocytic macrophages (timd4+ and cd5l+; mostly in liver spleen and adre- nal) and perivascular macrophages (f13a1+ and lyve1+; widely distributed) (fig s27a and fig 5).]
Summary: Identification of erythropoiesis and macrophage differentiation trajectories in adrenal gland, with distinct stages and cell types observed.

Text 320
10.1126/science.aba7721
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 6. integration of human fetal and mouse embryonic cell atlases. (a to c) after downsampling as described in the text, we applied seurat (15) to jointly analyze human fetal and mouse embryonic cells (11). (a) cells are colored by source species. (b) mouse cells are colored by the identity of the main mouse embryonic trajectory (11). human cells are colored in gray. (c) cells are colored by source and development stage. within each major trajectory and as has been shown previously (11), mouse cells order by successive time points, and human fetal cells appear to project from the last (e13.5) mouse embryonic time point. (d) we applied seurat (15) to jointly analyze']. Reference sentences:[the distribution of mouse cells in the resulting umap visualization was similar to our global analysis of moca (fig 6 a to c and fig s21 to s23) (11).for example human fetal endothelial hematopoietic hepatic epithelial and mesen- chymal cells all mapped to the corresponding mouse embryonic trajectories (fig 6b and fig s21).within each major trajectory mouse cells order by successive time point (11) whereas human fetal cells appear to project from the last (e13.5) mouse embryonic time point (fig 6c).to assess relationships between mouse em- bryonic and human fetal cells in greater detail we applied the same strategy to extracted cells from the hematopoietic (fig 6d and fig s24) endothelial (fig s25) and epithelial (fig s26) trajectories.out of 1087 human fetal blood cell type– specific gene markers that are also differen- tially expressed across mouse blood cell types 337 genes were differentially expressed (fdr of 0.05) in the same cell type (fig 6e and table s15; for comparison only 12 genes inter- sected after permutations of labels).in this same analysis human fetal macro- phage and microglia form distinct clusters but they are connected by a subset of mouse cells from the white blood cell trajectory (fig 6d) consistent with previous studies showing that both cell types differentiate from yolk sac pro- genitors (171).]
Summary: Cells from different species and developmental stages show distinct trajectories in the integrated analysis.

Text 321
10.1016/j.immuni.2020.11.017
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 2. cellular changes along covid-19 disease trajectories']. Reference sentences:[scrna-seq analysis identifies cellular changes along the covid-19 disease trajectory we first analysed scrna-seq data from 358930 cells with 10900 cells on average per sample (figure 2a).uniform manifold approximation and projection (umap) was used to visualize the structure of cellular populations (figure 2b-e).cells from individual patients were dispersed evenly in the umap representation with the exception of a higher degree of interindividual heterogeneity in the monocytic subpopulations (figure 2d e s2).prominently mk proportions were elevated throughout the course of the disease (figure 2f).serum crp il-6 and ifn-α (figure 2g).as we had observed a transient increase of circulating mks the cellular source of platelets (figure 2b) in the single-cell data and identified co-expression modules (m3 and m4) related to platelet counts and d-dimer levels we hypothesized that altered presence and function of mks might be a distinct feature of covid-19.we compared cell type proportions of healthy controls against patients using a mann-whitney non-parametric test and measured cell proportion changes between pseudotimes by comparing a linearlinear mixed model with pseudotime (proportion of cell type~pseudotime +[1|patientid]) and compared it against a reduce model without pseudotime (proportion of cell type +[1|patientid]) by the means of an anova (figure 2f).furthermore we correlated cell type proportion with the clinical parameters available for each sample using spearman correlation (figure 2g).]
Summary: Cellular changes along covid-19 disease trajectory, including elevated MK proportions and co-expression modules related to platelet counts.

Text 322
10.1016/j.celrep.2020.108438
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 3. innate ly6chigh monocytes show microenvironment-dependent plasticity in aged brain (a) umap clustering as in figure 1b with rna cluster 6 in turquoise (left) and with cell-id ly6chigh darkened (right, split by conditions). (b) re-clustered young and aged ly6chigh cells on umap (top left) and stacked bar charts of cluster frequencies (n = 3 biological replicates per group) (top right) and heatmap of ly6chigh subcluster degs (bottom). (c) trajectory of ly6chigh subclusters overlaid with indicated genes (top). heatmap of trajectory degs in cluster ordering (bottom). ordering is denoted by arrows at the bottom. (d) volcano plot of degps in ly6chigh subcluster 2 versus all other ly6chigh subclusters. (e) pca triplot of sparse canonical correlation analysis (cca) of microbiota families and ly6chigh degs in young and aged. dots represent cells from aged and triangles represent cells from young. ly6chigh subclusters are represented by different colors. gene names are in green and otus are in pink. (f) gene-microbial family correlation plot. red indicates positive and blue indicates negative correlation. all correlations have corr.test p < 0.01. all plots were derived from pooling three biological replicates per experimental condition. data in (d) were analyzed by wilcoxon rank-sum test. also see tables s2, s3, and s4.']. Reference sentences:[compared to cns-native myeloid cells we observed relatively increased transcriptional plasticity among the ly6c+ compartment in response to aging (figure 3a).in young mice cell-id ly6chigh cells largely centered around rna cluster 6 core signature (figure 3a left) but in aged control and aged abx mice these cells exhibited a more diverse transcriptome status by spreading across several rna clusters (figure 3a right).cell-id ly6chigh cells were subsetted and re-clustered into four transcriptionally distinct subclusters that varied in frequency between young and aged (figure 3b top).subcluster 0 expressed inﬂammatory genes including ifitm3 lyz2 and cxcl2 and subcluster 3 expressed proliferation markers mki67 and top2a (figure 3b bottom; table s2).in aged mice there was an increased frequency of ly6chigh subcluster 1 and emergence of subcluster 2 with high expression of cstg mpo and elane (figure 3b bottom).trajectory inference analysis using sling- shot through the dyno package indicated that ly6chigh subclus- ters shift from subcluster 3 (as the root) toward subclusters 0 and 1 ending at subcluster 2 (figure 3c top).ly6chigh subcluster 3 had a prominent proliferative signature marked by expression of mki67 anti-apoptotic gene birc5 and dna and nucleosome structural genes (top2a hist1h1b h2afz) (figure 3b bottom).ly6chigh subcluster 1 was enriched for mhc-ii complex path- ways while ly6chigh subcluster 2 was enriched for both mhc- ii and neutrophil-mediated cytotoxicity indicating that ly6chigh monocytes may experience transcriptional plasticity in response to an inﬂamed environment in the aged cns (figure 3d; fig- ure s2e; table s4).some of the overall changes in enrichment of these gene sets were attributed to ly6chigh subcluster 1 which was in higher abundance in aged mice (figure 3b; table s4).slingshot analysis predicted subcluster 4 as the root marked by high levels of cytotoxic genes (gzma and gzmb) and that these cells shifted into closely related subclusters 1 cell reports 33 108438 december 1 2020 5 resource ll open access a b d e f c figure 3.]
Summary: Trajectory analysis reveals transcriptional plasticity in aged ly6chigh cells, shifting from proliferative to immune response subclusters, influenced by the microenvironment.

Text 323
10.1016/j.celrep.2020.108438
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 5. cns innate lymphoid cell plasticity reﬂects chronic neuroinﬂammation in the aged brain (a) umap clustering as in figure 1b highlighting rna-based clusters 7 (blue) and 9 (purple) (left) and with cell-id ilcs darkened (right, split by conditions). (b) re-clustered young and aged ilcs on umap. plots split by young and aged (top left) and stacked bar charts of cluster frequencies (n = 3 biological replicates per group) (top right). dot plot of ilc subcluster expression level (color scale) and percentage (size of dot) for indicated cell types and associated marker genes (bottom). (c) heatmap of ilc subcluster degs. (d) volcano plot of degps in ilc subcluster 1 versus all other ilc subclusters. (e) trajectory of ilc subclusters overlaid with indicated genes. (f) heatmap of trajectory degs in cluster ordering. ordering is denoted by arrows at the bottom. all plots were derived from pooling three biological replicates per experimental condition. data in (d) were analyzed by wilcoxon rank-sum test. also see tables s2 and s3.']. Reference sentences:[ilc-like cells made up 2.5% of the total leukocytes we sequenced and predominantly exhibited transcriptome signa- tures of rna-based clusters 7 and 9 (figure 5a left; table s3).we observed increased dispersion of ilc-like cells into several rna-based clusters (figure 5a right).to further discern the nature of ilc plasticity we subsetted and re-clustered the ilc-like cells based on their individual tran- scriptomes (figure 5b).we first focused on ilc-like cells from young and aged brains and found that they segregated into four transcriptionally distinct clusters (figure 5b top left).aged ilc-like cells had significantly higher proportions of subclusters 0 and 1 (figure 5b top right).the ilc t cell- like subcluster 1 expressed t memory stem cells (tscm) marker genes (tcf7 cxcr3 and ly6a) (gattinoni et al. 2017) t memory cell transcription factor eomes (figure 5b bottom; table s2) and brain-resident memory t cell marker ccl5 (knox et al. 2014; steinbach et al. 2019) (figure s3d).compared to the other ilc subclusters the tscm-like cells were also enriched with t helper interleukin-17 (il-17) and t-cytotoxic pathways (figure 5d; table s4).subclusters 2 and 3 had some overlapping expression of natural killer (nk)-like genes (klrb1c klrk1 and ncr1) (figure 5c; table s2).there were no cells expressing the ilc3 marker gene rorc (figure 5b bottom).the trajectory projections indicated potential 8 cell reports 33 108438 december 1 2020 resource ll open access a b d e f c figure 5.cell reports 33 108438 december 1 2020 9 resource ll open access transdifferentiation of nk-like cells into ilc1s which then branched into either ilc2 or brain-resident tscm-like cells in the aged brain (figure 5b indicated by arrows).these findings and our result suggest that eomes transcription factor activity may potentially drive the shifting of ilc1/nk-like cells to tscm-like cells in the aged mouse brain as observed in our trajectory anal- ysis (figure 5f).cell reports 33 108438 december 1 2020 11 resource ll open access t.scm-like subtypes (figure 5b).with high expression of amphir- egulin (areg) ilc2s may be critical in type-2-mediated resistance and tolerance to maintain tissue integrity following damage or in chronically inﬂamed environments such as the aged brain (zaiss et al. 2015) (figure 5c).]
Trajectory of cell transitions with gene expression changes in aged brain single cells.

Text 324
10.1016/j.celrep.2020.108438
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 4. aged brain increases ly6clow patrolling monocyte plasticity (a) umap clustering as in figure 1b with rna cluster 3 in green (left) and with cell-id ly6clow darkened (right, split by conditions). (b) re-clustered young and aged ly6clow cells on umap (top left) and stacked bar charts of cluster frequencies (n = 3 biological replicates per group) (top right). heatmap of ly6clow subcluster degs (bottom) is shown. (c) trajectory of ly6clow subclusters overlaid with indicated genes (top). heatmap of trajectory degs in cluster ordering (bottom) is shown. ordering is denoted by arrows at the bottom. (d) volcano plot of degps in ly6clow subcluster 1 versus all other ly6clow subclusters. (e) pca triplot of sparse cca of microbiota families and ly6clow degs in young and aged. dots represent cells from aged and triangles represent cells from young. ly6clow subclusters are represented by different colors. gene names are in green and otus are in pink. (f) gene-microbial family correlation plot. red indicates positive and blue indicates negative correlation. all correlations have corr.test p < 0.01. all plots were derived from pooling three biological replicates per experimental condition. data in (d) were analyzed by wilcoxon rank-sum test. also see tables s2, s3, and s4.']. Reference sentences:[visualization of cell-id ly6clow cells on the transcriptome-based umap re- vealed that these cells spread into varying transcriptional signa- tures and dispersion was increased in both the aged control and aged abx conditions (figure 4a right).re-clustering of these cells revealed six distinct subclusters (figure 4b top left).only aged brains had ly6clow cells with the subcluster 5 signature and had a higher abundance of subcluster 1 (figure 4b top right).ly6clow subclusters 1 and 5 had overlapping marker genes and shared high levels of mitochondrial gene expression (mt-atp6 mt-co2 and mt-co3) (figure 4b bottom; table s2).6 cell reports 33 108438 december 1 2020 resource ll open access a b d e f c figure 4.with highly expressed mitochondrial genes (e.g. mt-co3) subclusters 1 and 5 seem- ingly serve as a transitory state before further evolving into sub- cluster 2 wherein the cells then branch into either subclusters 0 or 3 (figure 4c).ly6clow subcluster 2 had overlapping marker genes with subclusters 0 and 3 with a high expression of cd74 and lyz2 suggesting that this cluster serves as a transition state between differentiation into either subcluster 0 or 3 transcrip- tomic profiles (figure 4b bottom).subcluster 0 was marked by expression of mhc-ii genes (h2-aa h2-ab1 and cd74) sug- gesting that these cells upregulated antigen presentation possibly due to increased phagocytosis in response to tissue damage (figure 4b bottom).distinct from subcluster 1 subcluster 5 had high expression of il7r and nfkb1 suggesting that these cells may be responding to increased neuroinﬂammation in the aged brain and could be involved in regulating a t cell response (al-mossawi et al. 2019) (figure 4b bottom).both subclusters 1 and 5 were enriched for pathways involved in microglia cell migration which may be indicative of more general macrophage migration toward sites of injury and response to inﬂammatory stimuli (figure 4d; table s4).notably subcluster 1 was also en- riched for gene pathways in amyloid-beta clearance (figure 4d) which have been observed in cns phagocytic cells in response to neuroinﬂammation and alzheimer disease (saresella et al. 2014; the´ riault et al. 2015).]
Patterns related to cell trajectory and differentiation transitions in ly6clow subclusters in aged brain single-cell transcriptomics.

Text 325
10.1016/j.celrep.2020.108438
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 6. abx treatment alters ilc plasticity pattern in the aged mice (a) re-clustered young control and young abx ilcs on umap (top left) and stacked bar charts of cluster frequencies (n = 3 biological replicates per group) (top right). re-clustered aged control and aged abx ilcs on umap (bottom left) and stacked bar charts of cluster frequencies (n = 3 biological replicates per group) (bottom right). (b) heatmap of aged control and aged abx ilc subcluster degs. (c) trajectory of aged control and aged abx ilc subclusters overlaid with indicated genes. (d) heatmap of trajectory degs in cluster ordering. ordering is denoted by arrows at the bottom. all plots were derived from pooling three biological replicates per experimental condition. also see tables s2, s3, and s4.']. Reference sentences:[for both young and aged groups the ilc-like cells separated into three transcriptionally distinct clusters (figure 6a left).subcluster 2 resembled the ilc1 signature (ncr1 tbx21 and gzma) while subcluster 0 resembled ilc2s with the expression of hes1 areg and gata3 (figure 6b; table s2).sub- cluster 1 closely mirrored the tscm-like cluster previously described in the aged control mice expressing ly6a cd8a and cxcr3 (figure 6b; table s2).compared to young mice ilc-like cells in aged mice were shifted into ilc2 and a c b d figure 6.]
Patterns of trajectory in aged ilc subclusters, with distinct gene expressions, shifting towards ilc2 and tscm-like clusters.

Text 326
10.1038/s41593-020-00736-x
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 8 | schematic of the major principle of neuronal diversification in the developing cns versus ens. a, progenitor cells within the neural tube are patterned according to their position within the coordinates of morphogenetic cues. the transcription factor codes (depicted by different colors) of each progenitor cell are decoded into different neuron class identities at neurogenesis. further maturation leads to neuronal heterogeneity within each major neuron class. temporal specification mechanisms (important in telencephalon and ventral myelencephalon) are not accounted for here. b, in contrast to progenitor cells within the neural tube, ens progenitor cells are migratory and therefore lack distinct positional identities. a binary heterogeneity is apparent in neuroblasts undergoing their last cell cycle, resulting in postmitotic neurons with traits of enc1 or enc8. immature neurons either differentiate into these prototypic classes or differentiate further in a gradual diversification process where the initial features are downregulated and replaced by other transcriptional programs generating enc2–7 and enc9–12. schematic depicts the plausible branching process, but future interrogation is needed to resolve the trajectory of each enc in detail.']. Reference sentences:[the notch signaling pathway appeared strongly implicated in ens develop- ment given the differential expression of its molecular components across cell states (extended data fig 8).in the neural tube the differentiation of committed progenitor cells into specified neu- ronal subtypes occurs at stereotypical positions (fig 8a) making studies of gene regulatory networks attainable14.the present study puts forward a new model of enteric neuron specification (fig 8b).received: 6 may 2020; accepted: 7 october 2020; published: xx xx xxxx cns ens progenitor neuroblast neuron a b progenitor neuroblast neuron fig 8 | schematic of the major principle of neuronal diversification in the developing cns versus ens.]
Summary: Trajectory of neuronal diversification in CNS and ENS, from progenitor cells to postmitotic neurons with distinct identities, influenced by morphogenetic cues and migratory behavior.

Text 327
10.1038/s41467-020-20059-6
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 4 trajectory analysis of osteoclast cells (oc) in os lesions. a t-sne plot showing the three main subclusters of osteoclasts. b feature plots showing the normalized expression levels of myeloid and osteoclast markers cd74, cd14, acp5, ctsk, and top2a in these subclusters. c, d the monocle 2 trajectory plot showing the dynamics of osteoclast subclusters (c) and their pseudotime curve (d). e the degs (in rows, q-value < 10−10) along the pseudotime were hierarchically clustered into four subclusters. the top annotated go terms in each cluster were provided. f heatmap hierarchical clustering showing differentially expressed transcription factor genes along with the pseudotime curve in (e).']. Reference sentences:[based on t-sne and umap algorithm (fig 4a supplementary fig 11a b) three distinct subclusters of ocs were identified with a distinct expression of both myeloid markers such as cd74 cd14 and/or mature osteoclastic markers including ctsk and acp5 (fig 4b; supplementary data 3).we also performed the trajectory analysis of the ocs based on the monocle 2 algorithm and scorpius algorithm to infer oc maturation course in os lesions (fig 4c d supplementary fig 12a).particularly the gene patterns involved in the oc cell state transition were dissected (fig 4e supplementary fig 11e 12b).the genes related to antigen processing and presentation ifn-γ response hematopoietic stem cell differentia- tion mitotic nuclear division and cell cycle checkpoint were significantly reduced whereas the genes related to oc differ- entiation bone resorption and bone remodeling were significantly increased (fig 4e supplementary fig 12b).(fig 4f) were gradually down-regulated along with trajectory differentiation process.conversely some well-known factors such as nfatc1 spi1 and fosl2 were upregulated in the process (fig 4f) which are involved in regulating differentiation survival and size of oc3738.we also found some unidentified regulators such as jdp2 znf267 camta2 mlx hes4 and glmp in os lesions which are potentially engaged in the cellular transition from the myeloid monocytes into mature oc cells (fig 4f).]
Summary: Trajectory analysis reveals dynamic gene expression changes during osteoclast maturation in os lesions, with distinct clusters and regulatory factors identified.

Text 328
10.1126/science.aba4937
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 4. tls differentiation trajectories. (a) umap colored by identified clusters with trajectories inferred from rna velocity. gray arrow flows represent calculated velocity trajectories. (b) heatmap with scaled expression of genes involved in somitogenesis measured in 5966 cells from 120-hour tlss rooted in nmps and ordered by pseudotime. (c) umap colored by expression of indicated genes (left) and whole-mount in situ hybridization for the same genes in tls and e9.5 embryos (right). numbers indicate the fraction of tlss with embryo-like expression. scale bars, tls, 100 mm; embryo, 200 mm. (d) heatmap with scaled expression of genes involved in neural development measured in 3462 cells from 120-hour tlss rooted in nmps and ordered by']. Reference sentences:[rna velocity analysis revealed neural and somitic trajectories rooted in the nmps further suggesting that the tls recapitulates the de- velopmental dynamics observed in the mid- gestational embryo (fig 4a and fig s11a) (25).accordingly ordering of tls-derived cells along a pseudo- temporal trajectory showed that the somitic trajectory reflects the genetic cascade observed in the embryo (fig 4b and fig s12a).for example the trajectory from fgf8+ nmps and psm through the determination front marked by mesp2 to meox1+ somites was faithfully recapitulated and the embryo-like spatial ar- rangement was confirmed by whole-mount in situ hybridization (fig 4c) (8).likewise the genetic cascade from nmps to neural progen- itors reflected the in vivo differentiation path in space and time (fig 4d).we assigned pgclc identity using marker genes characteristic for pgcs and identified their location in the tls (fig 4e and fig s14).at 76 hours roughly correspond- ing to stage e6.5 we detected t/prdm14ve– coexpressing cell clusters (fig 4e and fig s14 a and b).at 108 hours we found a group of sox2ve-high cells that coexpressed dppa3 (fig 4e and fig s14c).at 120 hours sox2ve-high cells were detected in contact with foxa2+ cells and dppa3+ cells in contact with a tmch+ gut-like epithelial structure (fig 4e and fig s14d).]
Summary: Trajectories of cell differentiation in single-cell transcriptomics data mimic developmental dynamics, confirmed by gene expression patterns and in situ hybridization.

Text 329
10.1016/j.stem.2020.11.015
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 2. differentiation trajectory of human fetal hematopoietic cells (a) force-directed graph (fdg) visualization of the differentiation trajectory of hematopoietic cells from figure 1d. (b) paga trajectory model imposed on the fdg visualization of the differentiation trajectory. the size of the dots is proportional to the number of cells in the clusters. (c) heatmap showing dynamic expression of lineage-specific genes along the three differentiation paths (memp, granulocyte, and lmp path). cluster colors match those of (a) and (b). expression is standardized between 0 and 1, and the level is indicated by the grayscale color intensity. (d) heatmap of the normalized area under the curve (auc) score of selected tfs for each cell type obtained by pyscenic. cluster colors match those of (a) and (b). the auc score is standardized between 0 and 1 and indicated by the grayscale color intensity. (e) donut plots showing the percentages of cells in g1, s, and g2m phase in hscs/mpps, hscs/mpps-cycle, memps, memps-cycle, lmps, and gps. fa2, forceatlas2.']. Reference sentences:[then we used scanpy’s paga_path function to show how the gene expression and annotation changes along the three main paths (memps gps and lmps) present in the abstracted graph (figure 2c).in addition we identified a proliferative population of memps-cycle of which =92% were in g2m/s phase compared with 65% of memps (figure 2e).cells in this cluster differentially expressed myeloid line- age-specific genes (e.g. azu1 lyz and mpo) compared with hscs/mmps (figure 2c; figure s5d) and were highly cycling with 73% of cells in g2m/s phase (figure 2e).again this was a highly proliferative population of cells with =89% of cells in g2m/s phase (figure 2e).we found 162 regulons some of which some were enriched across many different cell types often as a part of the particular differentia- tion branch and some were cell type specific (figure 2d).we identified hlf and hoxa9 as main regulons in hscs/mpps whereas gata1 gata2 and tal1 were identified in the memp branch of the hematopoietic tree (figure 2d).in line with this cell cycle analysis confirmed that =36% of hscs/mpps were cycling compared with =53% of hscs/mpps-cycle (figure 2e).the activity of these tfs can be inferred however from a c d e b figure 2.]
Summary: Differentiation trajectory patterns of hematopoietic cells, including gene expression changes, cell cycle phases, and regulon activities.

Text 330
10.1016/j.stem.2020.11.015
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 3. single-cell chromatin accessibility analysis of human fetal hematopoiesis (a) umap visualization of the scatac-seq dataset (3,611 nuclei from cd34+ cd38– cells from the liver and bone marrow), colored by cluster. (b) top: bar plot showing the average accessibility of 36 selected marker genes from our scrna-seq data considering all cells. bottom: dot plot of the standardized accessibility of the marker genes (gene body ± 3 kb) in each of the seven clusters. for each gene, the minimum value of its accessibility is subtracted, and the result is divided by the maximum value of its accessibility. the dot size indicates the percentage of cells in each cluster in which the gene of interest is accessible. the standardized accessibility level is indicated by color intensity. (c) fdg visualization of the differentiation trajectory of hematopoietic cells from (a). (d) paga trajectory model imposed on the fdg visualization of the differentiation trajectory of hematopoietic cells from (a). the size of the dots is proportional to the number of cells in the clusters. (e) violin plots showing the chromatin accessibility in different clusters. p1,2 < 2 3 10à16, p2,3 < 2 3 10à16, p3,4 < 2 3 10à16, p4,5 < 2 3 10à16, p4,6 = 1.4eà07, p4,7 = 0.00235. p < 0.001; 0.001 < p < 0.01; 0.01 < p < 0.05; ns, not significant; p r 0.05. (f–h) heatmap showing the activity of lineage-specific tfs along differentiation trajectories.']. Reference sentences:[by using a shared nearest neighbor (snn) modularity optimization-based clustering algorithm we ob- tained seven distinct clusters of differentially accessible peaks (figure 3a).to explore the chromatin accessibility profiles across the seven clusters we examined the accessibility of selected marker genes from our scrna-seq data (figure 3b).we observed higher accessibility of marker genes associated with stem cells (e.g. mllt3 prom1 fli1 and gata2) and lower accessibility of genes associated with distinct lineages (e.g. mpo alas2 mpeg1 and cd19) keeping in line with the undifferentiated na- ture of sorted cells (figure 3b).cluster 6 had a mixed signature (figure 3b).we observed the highest accessibility in clusters 1 2 and 4 which decreased gradually toward the tips of the two branches (i.e. clusters 1 2 and 3 on one side and 1 4 5 and 6 and 1 and 6 on the other; figure 3e).gata1 activity (figures 3g and 3h) and gene body accessi- bility (figure 3b) were enriched in cluster 6.thus the identified trajectories between clusters 1 and 6 and clusters 1 4 5 and 6 most likely represent the memp differen- tiation paths (figure 3d).]
Summary: Trajectory analysis reveals differentiation paths between clusters based on chromatin accessibility and lineage-specific transcription factor activity in hematopoietic cells.

Text 331
10.1016/j.jtos.2020.12.004
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 4. reconstructing the developmental pseudotime trajectory of scrna-seq data. a. the single-cell trajectory was predicted by monocle 3 and visualized by umap. cells are ordered in pseudotime colored in a gradient from purple to yellow. b. monocle 3 generated pseudotemporal trajectory of 9 clusters identified in scrna-seq clustering from seurat analysis. number and color represent each cluster. c. plot of the pseudotime order for the 9 clusters from monocle 3 analysis. each dot represents a cell ordered in pseudotime grouped by clusters. cluster median is marked as a cross. distribution of pseudotime in each cluster is shown by the gradient color plotting each cell. d, e. cytotrace was used to predict the trajectory of the differentiation state of cells from nine clusters. predicted differentiation state was visualized in 2d and 3d t-sne plots based on the differentiation scores with the dotted arrow. f. differentiation model on umap based on the trajectory analysis using monocle 3 and cytotrace. the development and differentiation of the cells along the trajectory are in the order of clusters 10, 5, 6, 8, 1, 3, 4, 0, and 2, as shown in fig 4a–f. g. heatmap of genes whose expression shows a significant trend along this trajectory using functional pca in r. h, i. different expression patterns of significant genes on differentiation status from lsc to tdc predicted by trajectory analysis.']. Reference sentences:[the pseudotemporal analysis by monocle 3 which uses the reversed graph embedding technique to quantitatively estimate the pseudotime and calculate the trajectory path of biological progression [26–28] revealed a putative developmental stages of the lsc differentiation (fig 4a–c).moreover the estimated pseudotime from monocle 3 by assigning the lsc clusters as the root nodes elucidated the single-cell trajectory path in the order of clusters 10 5 6 8 4 1 3 0 and 2 (fig 4b and c).cytotrace analysis further confirmed the pseudotime order (clusters 10 5 6 8 1 3 4 0 and 2) for the trajectory of lsc differentiation (fig 4d–f).functional pca analysis [30] further showed that the top degs in these 9 clusters follow a trend along this trajectory (fig 4g).the ocular surface 20 (2021) 20–32 24 different trends of selected genes along the trajectory are clearly shown in fig 4h and i.for example the highly expressed genes in c10 (fig 4h) such as id3 ccni eif3g epas1 hsp90ab1 selm have been reported to involve in maintaining stem cell property and function [49].seventeen regulons that show distinct patterns across different cell fig 4.the development and differentiation of the cells along the trajectory are in the order of clusters 10 5 6 8 1 3 4 0 and 2 as shown in fig 4a–f.both analyses show the differentiation of the cells along the trajectory in the order of clusters 10 5 6 8 1 3 4 0 and 2 (fig 4a–f).functional pca analysis further showed that the top degs in these 9 clusters follow a significant trend along this trajectory (fig 4g–i).]
Summary: Trajectory analysis reveals differentiation patterns of cells in pseudotime order, confirmed by cytotrace and functional pca, showing gene expression trends along the trajectory.

Text 332
10.1016/j.cell.2020.12.016
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure s4. development of endothelial and pericyte compartment cells, related to figure 4 (a) selected endothelial population abundance changes over developmental time course shown as bar plots. wilcox rank test, p-value < 0.05 ; p-value < 0.01 ; p-value < 0.001; ns = not significant. error bars represent standard error of the mean (sem). (b) st spot cell type predictions of endothelial cluster 2 from single cell reference in (kinchen et al, 2018) (top) and large venous single cell signature from scrnaseq data here shown in adult slides (bottom). areas with vessels are zoomed in for clarity. all h&e images and corresponding st spot overlays are plotted over st h&e section a1, reference h&e images are repeated for clarity (top and bottom zoom). full image is available in (fawkner-corbett et al., 2020). (c) interacting cell network plot (i) showing cell type cross talk via specific receptor-ligand pair, angpt2 and tie1. ligand source clusters are indicated as circles, receptor target cells as squares; autocrine interactions are shown as diamonds. edges color indicates interaction score, node color ligand or receptor cell type specificity and node size indicates percentage of cells expressing ligand or receptor in the cluster. (ii) representative images of late (19–22 pcw) colonic sections stained for angpt2 protein by ihc with positive expression around vessels observed in the lamina propria (lp) and serosa (n=4 experiments on individual samples 19–22pcw, 20x/100x magnification, scale bar=180/40mm). (d) time course abundance changes in s- and g2m- phase pericytes, highlighting proliferating dynamics of pericyte compartments. abundance changes in cycling and non-cycling counterparts of pericyte progenitors, wnt6+ pericytes and contractile pericytes suggest these represent earlier proliferative cell states, while other cell types represent more differentiated cell phenotypes. error bars represent standard error of the mean (sem). (e) trajectory analysis using monocle algorithm of fibroblast, pericyte, muscularis and myofibroblast compartment cells highlights differentiation of pericytes and myofibroblasts from s1 (marked by adamdec1) and s3 (marked by ogn) like fibroblast progenitors respectively.']. Reference sentences:[]
Summary: Development and differentiation trajectories of endothelial and pericyte cells over time, including cell type predictions, interacting cell networks, and abundance changes in proliferating pericyte compartments.

Text 333
10.1016/j.cell.2020.12.016
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure s3. epithelial compartment fetal intestinal development, related to figure 3 (a) developmental trajectory analyses of epithelial compartment cells using monocle algorithm (i) shown over umap embedding, colored by pseudotime and rna velocity estimates (ii) shown over umap embedding, colored by cell clusters. (b) volcano plot (i) showing differentially expressed genes between colonic and ti stem cells. selected genes are labelled. (c) interacting cell network plots showing cell type cross talk via specific receptor-ligand pairs. ligand source clusters are indicated as circles, receptor target cells as squares; autocrine interactions are shown as diamonds. edges color indicates interaction score, node color ligand or receptor cell type specificity and node size indicates percentage of cells expressing ligand or receptor in the cluster. (d) volcano plot (left) showing differentially expressed genes between stem cells and stem-like progenitor cells. selected genes are highlighted. violin plots showing stem cell-specific lgr5 expression and progenitor specific vtn expression are shown on the right. (e) goblet (left) and enteroendocrine (right) population abundance changes over developmental time course shown as bar plots. wilcox rank test, p-value < 0.05 ; p-value < 0.01 ; p-value < 0.001; n.s = not significant. error bars represent standard error of the mean (sem). (f) dot plot (i) heatmap showing selected epithelial secretory cell sub cluster markers. points are scaled by percentage of cells with at least minimal (>0) detection of marker within the cluster and colored by mean cluster expression. secretory sub-clusters are visualized as a umap embedding (ii), with overlays of developmental time point (iii) and location (iv). (g) best4/otop2 population abundance remains the same over developmental time course shown as bar plots (i). wilcox rank test, p-value < 0.05 ; p-value < 0.01 ; p-value < 0.001; ns = not significant. (ii) circos plot visualizing putative cross-talk between best4/otop2 cells and inhibitory motor neurons. error bars represent standard error of the mean (sem).']. Reference sentences:[]
Summary: Trajectory analysis of epithelial cells during fetal intestinal development, differential gene expression between stem cells and progenitor cells, and changes in abundance of secretory cell populations over time.

Text 334
10.1016/j.cell.2020.12.016
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure s6. development of fibroblast compartment, related to figure 4 (a) dot plot heatmap showing selected fibroblast cell sub cluster markers. points are scaled by percentage of cells with at least minimal (>0) detection of marker within the cluster and colored by mean cluster expression. (b) developmental trajectory analyses of fibroblast compartment cells using monocle algorithm shown over umap embedding, colored by pseudotime (left). umap overlay (right) of nr2f1 tf module auc scores, delineating s1/s2 type cells from s3 type fibroblasts. (c) time course changes in the proliferating s- and g2m- phase cells in the fibroblast compartment. s3 progenitor population constitutes the most abundant and the most enriched (data not shown) over g1-phase cells population. error bars represent standard error of the mean (sem). (d) circos plot visualizing putative cross-talk between s3+ hand1+ cells and arterial and venous endothelial cells. (e) st adult slide spot overlay of expression of receptor-ligand pair ceacam1 and ceacam5, showing significant co-localization of these molecules (i). st slide overlay of lrp1 and hspg2 receptor-ligand pair in adult st slide (ii) and 12 pcw st slide (iii). all h&e images and corresponding st spot overlays in are plotted over selected regions of st h&e sections a1 (i-ii) and a6 (iii), reference h&e images repeated for clarity. full images are available in (fawkner-corbett et al., 2020).']. Reference sentences:[]
Summary: Trajectory analysis of fibroblast cells, showing developmental progression, cell cycle changes, and potential interactions with endothelial cells.

Text 335
10.1038/s41556-020-00613-6
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 6 | aec cells undergo ecm remodelling and are enriched in crpc. a,b, tsne view of ecs from normal-crpc samples, colour-coded by clusters (a) and marker gene expression (b). c, qusage scores, indicating similarities among ec clusters in batch 1 and 3 data. d, top: all ecs from normal-crpc samples ordered along pseudotime trajectories, colour-coded by clusters. bottom: schematics of the trajectories, with pie chart colour-coded by average pseudotime and percentage of cells from crpc samples in the indicated cluster. two-sided p values are calculated for spearman’s rank correlation and not adjusted for multiple comparisons. e, differential activation of focal adhesion and ecm–receptor interaction pathways among all seven ec clusters. f, dot plots of flow cytometry showing percentage of cd31+ and cd90+ aecs in normal, primary prostate adenocarcinoma (adpc) and castration-resistant prostate cancer (crpc) samples. g, quantification of aec percentage in f. p values (student’s t-test, n=4 independent samples, two-sided) for normal versus adpc and adpc versus crpc are 0.033 and 0.001, respectively. h, number of invading fields after pc3 co-culture with parental or cd31+/cd90+ aec cells. data are taken from three replicates. p=0.025 (student’s t-test, n=11 fields examined, two-sided). statistical data relevant to g and h are provided in the source data.']. Reference sentences:[we used flow cytometry to isolate psma-positive t cells from tumour tissues (extended data fig 6ab).to test the capacity of tumour cells to alter t-cell gene expression profiles we cultured t cells sorted from healthy donors (methods) together with two prostate cancer cell lines (extended data fig 6cd) and examined the klk3 abundance in t cells after 24 h. co-culturing with the ar-positive c4-2b but not the ar-negative tumour 0 1000 2000 3000 35 402 192 310 733 241 110 12 45 2552 left ln 0 500 1000 1500 606 87 0 6 17 9 1209 right ln 0 endothelia fibroblast mast monocytic myofibroblast neutrophil pdc plasma t b 2 1 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 20 1 klk3 klk3/dapi ec4-2b edu145 ctrl no.see also extended data fig 6.additionally immunofluorescent staining revealed localization of psa in cd8+ t cells co-cultured with evs from c4-2b but not du145 cells (extended data fig 6e).a discontinuous ultracentri- fugation iodixanol gradient of the ev-containing pellet shows that both the klk3 rna and protein are predominantly present in the vesicles but not in the ev free fractions which are known to con- tain soluble material (methods and extended data fig 6fg).cells from tumour show distinct separation from ln samples (extended data fig 6hi).in line with the expression being ev-mediated the abundance of klk3 in t cells and the rest of the tme are much lower than in epithelial cells (extended data fig 6j–l).of invasing cells per field cd31+/ cd90+ p = 0.025 normal adpc crpc 0 2 4 6 % cd31/cd90+ cells p = 0.033 p = 0.001 20 0 20 25 0 25 50 dimension 1 dimension 2 543210 6 10 6 q1 q4 q3 0.030 11.0 88.6 q1 96.7 q1 58.8 q4 35.6 q4 1.25 q2 0.34 q2 2.06 q2 3.99 q3 1.67 q3 0.019 10 5 10 4 10 3 10 2 10 2 10 3 10 4 comp-fl1-h :: b525-fitc-h normal adpc fitc-cd31 crpc comp-flb-h :: y763-pc7-h pe/cy7-cd90 10 6 10 5 10 4 10 3 10 2 10 2 10 3 10 4 comp-fl1-h :: b525-fitc-h comp-flb-h :: y763-pc7-h 10 6 10 5 10 4 10 3 10 2 10 2 10 3 10 4 comp-fl1-h :: b525-fitc-h comp-flb-h :: y763-pc7-h 1 3 2 fig 6 | aec cells undergo ecm remodelling and are enriched in crpc.we performed scrna-seq of six prostate tissues obtained during radical cystectomy for blad- der cancer and five tumours from crpc patients (fig 6ab and supplementary table 1 batch 3).we detected thy1-positive subsets resembling the aec population in this normal-crpc cohort (fig 6c).strikingly the two aec clusters (0 and 1) consisted mostly of cells from crpc samples (fig 6d).activation of the ecm–receptor interaction and focal adhesion pathways was also observed in the aec subsets (fig 6e).consistent with our analysis a significantly higher fraction of aecs were isolated from crpc compared to adpc and normal prostate samples (fig 6fg; student’s test p = 0.001 and 0.033 respectively).as expected a significantly (student’s test p = 0.025) increased invasion was observed in the aec co-culture condition (fig 6h).the gating strategy to identify the different cell types is shown in extended data fig 6a.the gating strategy to identify different cell types is shown in fig 6f.statistical data relevant to extended data fig 6c-d g are provided in the source data.unprocessed western blots relevant to extended data fig 6f are provided in the source data.]
AEC cells in single-cell data show enrichment in CRPC samples, with distinct trajectories and differential pathway activation.

Text 336
10.1038/s41556-020-00613-6
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 5 | identifying an activated ec cell subset in stromal cells. a, tsne view of caf cells, colour-coded by subtype. b, tsne view of caf cells, colour-coded by the indicated marker gene abundance. c, top five most enriched gene ontology (go) terms for each caf subset. d,e, tsne view of 3,115 ecs, colour-coded by re-evaluated clusters (d) and expression level of marker genes (e). f, all ecs ordered along pseudotime trajectories, with the cells colour-coded by cluster. g, smoothened distribution of representative membrane-protein-coding genes that are differentially expressed among ec subtypes. the left dendrogram was calculated using all differential genes and is coloured according to group membership. h, number of unique cell communication pairs in each cell type. i, overlap among the unique outgoing cell communication pairs from fibroblasts, canonical ecs and activated ecs (aecs) to epithelial cells. j, aec specific outgoing cell communication pairs. k, genes in ecm–receptor interaction and focal adhesion pathways that show differential expression among canonical ecs and aecs. see also extended data fig 7 and supplementary table 3.']. Reference sentences:[we focused on interactions unique to c6 (extended data fig 5a) and find they are mostly related to oc regulation.indeed c6 tam is detectable across all samples (extended data fig 5b) indicating early onset of tme remodelling that contributes to tumour spread.decreased lipid and amino-acid metabolism with increased glycolysis level was observed in treg cells consistent with previous studies of foxp3-positive thymus-derived treg cells32 (extended data fig 5cd).interestingly the three clusters (2 3 and 5) consisting of cd8+ t effector cells show substantial heterogeneity (extended data fig 5c).cluster 5 is the least activated subtype with the lowest levels of most metabo- lism and immune pathways while cluster 3 shows the characteris- tics of highly activated t cells (fig 3h and extended data fig 5c).moreover other androgen receptor (ar) signature genes are mostly not expressed (extended data fig 5e) indicating klk3 abundance might be of exogenous origin rather than from acti- vation of ar signalling in t cells.see also extended data fig 5 and supplementary table 2.we identified 948 fibro- blast cells (fig 5a).the five distinct clusters were classified into three subtypes according to similarities among each cluster and key marker genes expression (fig 5ab and extended data fig 7a).most markers show unique expression patterns across the three subtypes with only the general mesenchymal gene vim showing a high and universal signal (fig 5b).not surprisingly the angiogenesis-associated genes are enriched in all subtypes (fig 5c) while myofibroblastic cell adhesion and extracellular matrix (ecm) related ones (fig 5c and supplementary table 3) are more subtype-specific.we detected 3115 ecs which are further classified into six subclusters (fig 5d).the presence of flt1 and absence of pdpn expression sug- gest that the ecs are derived from vascular rather than lymphatic ves- sels (fig 5e).interestingly we observed that genes related to activated cafs are highly expressed in ec subsets (fig 5e).pseudotime analysis of the aecs using monocle13 (methods) sug- gested two diverging cell fates starting at clusters 0 and 1 progress- ing towards clusters 3 and 4 at one end and cluster 5 at the other with cluster 2 being a transitioning state spreading along the axis (fig 5f).indeed differential gene expression analysis attributed the six clusters to the four subtypes concordant with the pseudo- time states (fig 5g).a more detailed inspection of the differen- fig 5 | identifying an activated ec cell subset in stromal cells.notably aecs have higher numbers of inferred interactions with epithelial cells (fig 5h).among the aec unique pairs are interactions between bmp2 and the type i/ii bmp receptors (bmpr1a bmpr2) which induce migration and invasion in human ecs (fig 5j)46.statistical data relevant to extended data fig 5b are provided in the source data.]
Identification of activated cell subsets in stromal cells based on trajectory analysis and differential gene expression, with a focus on unique cell communication patterns.

Text 337
10.1038/s41467-020-20598-y
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 3 scrna-seq and wgcna reveal neural cells and melanocytes as off-target cells. a scrna-seq was performed at hipsc, sclerotome, cp, and six chondrogenic pellet time points. b reconstruction of differentiation trajectory reveals an off-target lineage bifurcation toward neural cells. a total of 19,195 cells that passed quality control from the stage of hipsc to d42 chondrogenic pellet were used to reconstruct the differentiation trajectory. c chondrogenic markers were enriched in the chondrogenic branch, while neurogenic markers were observed in the branch of neurogenesis. d annotated cell populations at different time points during hipsc chondrogenesis. cells that passed quality are used for tsne plots; cp: 1888 cells, d1: 2216 cells, d7: 1200 cells, d14: 2148 cells, d28: 1271 cells, and d42: 1328 cells. e wgcna and go term analysis identified wnt4 as a hub gene of neurogenesis while wnt2b was highly associated with melanocyte development. scrna-seq data of d14 pellets (with a total of 2148 cells and 3784 genes) was used for this computation.']. Reference sentences:[to dissect this cellular heterogeneity nine samples from the stan cell line at various differentiation time points were collected for scrna-seq (fig 3a).sequencing of mixed-species ensured a low cell multiplet rate (2.7%) (supplementary fig 3a).canonical correlation analysis (cca) was used to align cells from the two batches15 (supplementary fig 3b).the cells in the same cluster from different batches exhibited a high correlation in their gene expression (spearman’s rank coefficient rs > 0.87 for all clusters) (supplementary fig 3c).furthermore genes that were highly conserved in one particular cluster showed similar expression patterns in the clusters from distinct batches suggesting that our differentiation is highly reproducible (supplementary fig 3d).we used the monocle2 r package to reconstruct the differentiation trajectory from the stage of hipscs to d42 chondrocytes with a total of 19195 cells that passed quality control (fig 3b)16.while cells following chondrogenic fate expressed chondrocyte markers including acan col2a1 sox9 and cartilage oligomeric matrix protein (comp) we found one major branchpoint diverting cell fate toward neural lineage with the expression of neural cell markers such as nestin (nes) orthodenticle homeobox 2 (otx2) sox2 and wnt3a (fig 3c).other neural cell markers such as otx1 and pax6 were also enriched in this branch (supple- mentary fig 3e).to explore distinct cell populations at each stage scrna-seq data were subjected to unsupervised clustering and visualized using t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding (tsne) plots (fig 3d).for example 2 of 7 clusters identified at the chondropro- genitor (cp) stage not only had high expression levels of sox4 and sox9 but were also enriched in several markers resembling neural crest cells including pax3 and forkhead box d3 (foxd3) (supplementary fig 3f)17.similarly 4 clusters at the cp stage exhibited markers of the neural lineage including sox2 otx1/2 and pax6 and thus were annotated as neurogenic lineage cells while prrx1 col1a1 and col3a1 are known markers for mesenchyme (supplementary fig 3g)18.similar major cell populations were also observed in d1 and d3 pellets and it appeared that the percentage of chondrogenic cells increased in d7 while there was a decreased percentage of neural crest cells over time (supplemen- tary fig 3h i).ihc of the pellets labeling for nes and mitf further confirmed the presence of neural cells and melanocytes (supplementary fig 3j) suggesting that the focal black dots observed at the surface of pellets are likely to be the pigment accumulation in melanocytes.furthermore mesenchy- mal cells in d14 pellets expressed several conventionally recognized msc markers (supplementary fig 3k).the genes in the mod- ules of nervous system development and melanin biosynthetic process were then used to build corresponding grns and sub- networks by cytoscape while hub genes were determined by degree (node connectivity) weight (association between two genes) and betweenness centrality (bc) measure of the network (fig 3e and supplementary fig 4a–c)21.]
Summary: Differentiation trajectory from hipsc to chondrogenic pellets revealed a bifurcation towards neural cells, with neurogenic and chondrogenic markers enriched in respective branches. Hub genes wnt4 and wnt2b were identified for neurogenesis and melanocyte development.

Text 338
10.1038/s41467-020-20598-y
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 5 scrna-seq of pellets with wnt inhibition shows improved chondrogenesis. a scrna-seq was performed on the pellets with wnt inhibition. b chondrocytes and mesenchymal cells were two major populations in c59-treated pellets. cells that passed quality control were used for tsne plots; hipsc: 4798 cells, cp: 1888 cells, d7: 1682 cells, d14: 3076 cells, d28: 1756 cells, and d42: 1483 cells. c differentiation trajectory of c59-treated pellets. scrna-seq data with a total of 14,683 cells from the stage of hipsc, cp as well as d7, d14, d28, and d42 c59-treated pellets were used to reconstruct the differentiation trajectory. d c59-treated pellets exhibited decreased neurogenic markers but increased chondrogenic markers. e multiple cca alignment of d7–d42 pellets. a total of 7977 cells from d7–d42 timepoints of c59-treated pellets were used to perform cca alignment. f dynamic changes in gene expression and percentages of chondrocyte subpopulations over time. g heat map of top 20 degs at each timepoint for lect1/epyc/frzb+ early mature chondrocytes.']. Reference sentences:[furthermore c59-treated pellets showed a more homogenous distribution of col2a1 rna-fish labeling vs. tgf-β3-treated pellets (fig 4e and supplementary fig 5).to determine how wnt inhibition altered cell populations in chondrogenesis and to identify chondrocyte subpopulations pellets treated with c59 were analyzed using scrna-seq with a total of 14683 cells from the stage of hipsc cp as well as d7 d14 d28 and d42 c59-treated pellets (fig 5a b).the differentiation trajectory of c59- treated chondrogenesis was reconstructed using scrna-seq datasets of hipsc and cp stages from the previous sequencing (since they did not involve c59 intervention) (fig 5c).com- pared to the trajectory built from tgf-β3-treated pellets c59- treated pellets exhibited little if any neurogenic markers but showed enriched expression for chondrogenic markers (fig 5d).chondrocytes in c59-treated pellets comprised several sub- populations as identified by multiple cca alignment of d7-d42 timepoints with a total of 7997 cells (fig 5e f and supplementary fig 6b c) including one mesenchymal popula- tion and four conserved chondrocyte subsets with enriched col2a1 and sox9 expression.as lect1/epyc/frzb+ chondrocytes had the highest levels of col2a1 and acan expression we investigated the degs of this particular population at various time points (fig 5g).]
Summary: Trajectory analysis of chondrogenesis in c59-treated pellets revealed dynamic changes in gene expression and chondrocyte subpopulations over time.

Text 339
10.1038/s41467-020-20598-y
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 1 degs of mesodermal and chondrogenic differentiation of three hipsc lines by bulk rna-seq. a schematic of the chondrogenic differentiation protocol for hipscs. b, c pca indicates that three unique hipsc lines followed similar differentiation trajectories. d, e degs averaged from three unique hipsc lines at each stage of differentiation, respectively. each column of the heatmap represents a comparison between two stages/time points, and each gene presented was assigned a colored dot (following the gene label). the color of the dot matches the color of the timepoint label on the left side of the heatmap. when the color of a gene label and a timepoint label match, that gene was significantly upregulated at the corresponding time points.']. Reference sentences:[previously we reported a robust differentiation protocol that can drive hipscs toward a chondrogenic lineage via the paraxial mesoderm7 (supplementary fig 1a b).to determine tran- scriptome profiles over the course of differentiation three inde- pendent hipscs lines (atcc bjff and stan) were collected for bulk rna-seq at various stages (fig 1a).principal compo- nent analysis (pca) reveals that the three hipsc lines follow similar mesodermal and chondrogenic differentiation trajectories (fig 1b c).for example t-box transcription factor t (tbxt) and mix paired-like homeobox (mixl1) were upregulated at the anterior primitive streak (anterior ps) stage compared to hipscs10 (fig 1d; supplementary table 1).markers representing meso- dermal derivatives including t-box 6 (tbx6) unc homeobox (uncx) and paired box 9 (pax9) were upregulated sequentially at the stages of paraxial mesoderm early somite and sclerotome respectively (fig 1d; supplementary fig 1c).chondrogenic markers such as matrilin 4 (matn4) aggrecan (acan) collagen type vi alpha 3 chains (col6a3) collagen type ix alpha 1 chain (col9a1) and sry-box 6 and 9 (sox6 and sox9) were upregulated as early as at day 7 (d7) while the expression of collagen type ii alpha 1 chain (col2a1) was increased at d21 (fig 1e; supplementary table 2).interestingly c59 treatment differentially inﬂuenced the expression of various growth factors and receptors in the tgf-β superfamily essential in regulating chondrogenesis33 (supplementary note 1 supple- mentary fig 10b–e supplementary fig 11a b and supple- mentary fig 12a b).finally for six days cells were driven to the cp stage with 20 ng ml−1 of human bone morphogenetic protein 4 (bmp4; r&d systems #314-bp-010/cf) daily (supplementary fig 1a).]
Summary: Trajectory of differentiation from hipscs to chondrogenic lineage, shown by gene expression changes across stages.

Text 340
10.1038/s41422-020-00455-9
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 3 cd8+ t-cell phenotypes in mild and critical covid-19 bal. a pseudotime trajectories for cd8+ t-cells based on slingshot, showing 3 lineages (trm-lineage, tex-lineage and temra-lineage), color-coded for the cd8+ t-cell phenotypes (upper panel), the pseudotime (middle panel) and the number of clonotypes (lower panel). since no sctcr-seq data were available from healthy lung tissue, the number of temracells is very low in the clonotype analysis. b profiling of marker and functional genes along these trajectories to confirm their functional annotation. c dynamics of t-cell proliferation along the cd8+ t-cell lineages are depicted by plotting cell cycle g2m and s scores. d density plots reﬂecting the number of t-cells along the 3 cd8+ t-cell lineages. e density plots reﬂecting the number of t-cells along the 3 cd8+ t-cell lineages stratified for non-covid-19, covid-19 and normal lung. f density plots reﬂecting the number of t-cells along the 3 cd8+ t-cell lineages stratified for mild vs critical covid-19. g analysis of clonotype sharing (thickness indicates proportion of sharing, circle size indicates clonotype counts) between the cd8+ t-cells. h, i tcr richness and tcr evenness along the 3 t-cell lineages for non-covid-19 vs covid-19 (h), and mild vs critical covid-19 (i). j, k gene expression dynamics along the cd8+ trm- (j) and tex-lineage (k). genes cluster into 5 gene sets, each of them characterized by specific expression profiles, as depicted by a selection of marker gene characteristic for each set. differences in trajectories were assessed by mann–whitney test. for cd8+ trm: covid-19 vs non-covid-19 (p = 1.0e-6), mild vs critical covid-19 (p = 5.9e102). for cd8+ tex: covid-19 vs non-covid-19 and normal lung (p = 2.3e-67), mild vs critical (p = 1.1e-39). for cd8+ temra: normal lung vs covid-19 and non-covid-19 (p = 3.8e-39).']. Reference sentences:[we observed 3 distinct trajectories (fig 3a): cd8+ tn-cells connected with tem-cells which subsequently branched into 3 different (well-connected) lineages i.e. trm-cells tex-cells and temra-cells with nearly all cd8+ tn-cells (99.6%) shared by all 3 trajectories (supplementary information fig s2e).profiling of marker genes inhibitory checkpoints cytotoxic markers and proliferation along these trajectories confirmed their functional annotation (fig 3b c).notably besides increasing inhibitory checkpoint and cytotoxic marker expression cd8+ tex-cells were characterized by proliferation (supplementary information fig s2f) with g2m and s gene scores progressively increasing along the trajectory (fig 3b c).next density plots reﬂecting the relative number of t-cells in each phenotypic state were created along these trajectories (fig 3d) and stratified for normal tissue non- covid-19 and mild or critical covid-19.non-covid-19 t-cells were enriched towards the end of the trm-lineage while in covid- 19 this was the case for the tex-lineage (fig 3e).when comparing mild to critical covid-19 cells from the trm-lineage were enriched at the end of the lineage in mild covid-19 while along the tex-lineage such enrichment was most prominent for critical covid-19 (fig 3f).based on tcr sharing we could reinforce the 3 trajectories identified by slingshot (fig 3g).plotting tcr richness and evenness along the trajectories revealed that both parameters were reduced along the trm-lineage specifically in covid-19 (fig 3h) likely indicating antigen-driven clonal expansion.notably this expansion was more prominent in mild covid-19 (fig 3i).in the trm-lineage set 1 and 2 consisted of naïve t-cell markers (set 1: ccr7 lef1 tcf7; set 2: sell) whose expression decreased along the trajectory (fig 3j; supplementary information table s5).in the tex-lineage the first gene set contained naïve t-cell markers (lef1 ccr7 tcf7) a second ifn-induced (anti-viral) genes (mx1 mx2 isg15 ifi44 ifit5 ifi6) while a third besides ifng and ifn-induced genes (ifi27 ifi27l2) was comprised of t- cell activation-related genes (cd38 gzmh gzma) chemokines (ccl3 ccl4 and ccl5) cytotoxicity- (nkg7 gnly gzmb) and (inﬂammatory) exhaustion-related genes (havcr2) (fig 3k; supplementary information table s6).]
Summary: Trajectories of CD8+ T-cells show distinct lineages with marker gene expression, proliferation dynamics, clonotype sharing, and gene expression changes in COVID-19.

Text 341
10.1038/s41422-020-00455-9
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 5 monocyte-to-macrophage differentiation in covid-19 bal. a subclustering of myeloid cells into 9 phenotypes, as indicated by the color-coded legend. b heatmap showing myeloid cell phenotypes with corresponding functional gene sets. c relative contribution of each cell type (in %) to covid-19 vs non-covid-19 bal. d relative contribution of each cell type (in %) to mild vs critical covid-19 bal. e pseudotime trajectories for myeloid cells based on slingshot, showing the common branch of fcn1hi monocytes differentiating into either rgs1hi monocyte-derived macrophages (rgs1hi-lineage) or fabp4hi tissue-resident alveolar macrophages (alveolar lineage). f profiling of marker genes along these trajectories to confirm their functional annotation: fcn1, s100a12, ccl2, ccl18 for the common branch, fabp4 and pparg for the alveolar lineage, rgs1 and gpr183 for the rgs1-lineage. g density plots reﬂecting the number of myeloid cells along the 2 lineages stratified for non-covid-19 vs covid-19. h density plots reﬂecting the number of myeloid cells along the 2 lineages stratified for mild vs critical covid-19. i gene expression dynamics along the alveolar lineage. genes cluster into 5 gene sets, each of them characterized by specific expression profiles, as depicted by a selection of genes characteristic for each cluster. j normalized atp level measured from bal supernatans comparing covid-19 vs non-covid-19 (left) and mild vs critical covid-19 patients (right). k–m profiling of ifn type i and ii signaling along the 3 cd8+ (k) and cd4+ (l) t-cell lineages, and along the monocyte-macrophage lineage (m), comparing mild vs critical covid-19. all p values were assessed by a mann–whitney test. p < 0.05, p < 0.01, p < 0.001. p values comparing covid-19 vs non-covid19, and mild vs critical covid-19 for density plots were all < 10e-50.']. Reference sentences:[the combined effects of th1-like- and th17-cells are indeed known to regulate immune responses against viral infection-associated inﬂammation by enhancing balancing and regulating each other’s activities and persistence.2930 trajectory of monocyte-to-macrophage differentiation in covid-19 bal in the 63114 myeloid cells derived from bal we identified 9 phenotypes (fig 5a).monocytes could be further divided into fcn1high il1bhigh and hspa6high monocytes (fig 5b; supplementary information fig s3a) respectively characterized by expression of classical monocyte markers (il1rn s100a8/9) pro-inﬂammatory cytokines (il1b il6 ccl3 ccl4) and heat-shock proteins (hspa6 hspa1a/b).we observed a significant increase in fcn1high and il1bhigh monocytes in covid-19 vs non-covid-19 especially in critical disease (fig 5c; supplementary information fig s3c).fcn1high monocytes were significantly reduced in mild vs critical covid-19 while alveolar macrophages were increased (fig 5d).the latter subse- quently branched into rgs1high monocyte-derived macrophages (rgs1-lineage) or via fabp4medium into fabp4high tissue-resident macrophages (alveolar lineage; fig 5e).monocyte marker expres- sion decreased along both lineages while macrophage marker expression increased (fig 5f; supplementary information fig s3d) fig 4 cd4+ t-cell developmental trajectories in mild and critical covid-19 bal.article 279 cell research (2021) 31:272 – 290 as reported previously.193132 density plots revealed that in covid- 19 cells were enriched in the first half of both lineages (fig 5g) confirming our above observations of monocyte enrichment in covid-19.comparing mild to critical covid-19 revealed a similar difference (fig 5h).modeling gene expression along the alveolar lineage revealed 5 gene sets (fig 5i; supplementary information table s9).this was confirmed by atp measurements on bal supernatant showing a 3-fold higher atp level in critical covid-19 vs non- covid-19 (p = 0.016; fig 5j).in mild vs critical covid-19 we observed that amongst several other pathways ifn- (type i and ii) interleukin (e.g. il12 and il6) and oligoadenylate synthetase (oas) antiviral response signaling was increased in cd8+ trm- and tex-lineages (fig 5k; supplementary information fig s4b e).the cd4+ th1-lineage was similarly characterized by increased ifn- (type i and ii) and interleukin (il6 il12 il21) signaling in mild covid-19 (fig 5l; supplementary information fig s4f g).the alveolar macrophage lineage was characterized by increased phagocytosis-related pathways (scavenging recep- tors synthesis of lipoxins or leukotrienes) and ifn-signaling in mild covid-19 (fig 5m; supplementary information fig s4j–m).]
The trajectory of myeloid cell differentiation in COVID-19 BAL, showing distinct lineages branching from monocytes to macrophages with specific gene expression dynamics.

Text 342
10.1093/plcell/koab025
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 3. the endogenous diurnal phase of individual cells explains the heterogeneity of batch cell cultures. (a) umap plot for the 9,517 sequenced cells grown in fe + conditions from experiment 1. the cells were separated into clusters by seurat (stuart et al., 2019) and are indicated by the color gradient, with the color key on the right side of the plot. (b) same as (a), but with 9,748 sequenced cells grown in fe– conditions from experiment 1. (c, d), trajectory plot of fe + (c) and fe– (d) cells from experiment 1, colored according to their constituent clusters, as determined by monocle. (e, f), heatmap representation of the average diurnal module scores associated with all clusters identified for fe + (e) and fe– (f) cultures. we calculated a diurnal module score for each cluster in 1-h phase bins based on diurnal phase data reported by zones et al. (2015) of high-confidence rhythmic genes, defined as the overlap of rhythmic genes from two recent studies (zones et al., 2015; strenkert et al., 2019).']. Reference sentences:[we then ran unsupervised clustering on the fe + cells from the first ex- periment using a k nearest neighbor algorithm which iden- tified 15 clusters (figure 3a).monocle identified a single trajectory for both fe-sufficient and fe-deficient cells (figure 3 c and d; supplemental figure 4 a–d) and allowed a clear ordering of clusters.as shown in figure 3e the resulting phase module scores followed a clear pattern that ordered the clusters along the diurnal cycle with cluster #0 exhibit- ing a phase close to dawn and clusters #2 and #3 showing a phase close to dusk.fe-deficient cells broadly followed a similar pattern (figure 3f).pseudo-time construction reveals the phase ordering of batch cultures until this point we have considered one cell cluster as a unit and projected the diurnal module scores onto the clus- ters (figure 3).as pseudo-time increased the trajectory progressed from cluster #0 through all other clusters in a counterclockwise fashion to end with clusters #2 and #3 with a strong time signature around 14 h that 4 2 0 2 7.5 5.0 2.5 0.0 2.5 component 1 2 1 0 1 2 3 2 0 2 4 component 1 5 0 5 8 4 0 4 umap 1 9876543210 10 11 12 13 14 fe+ cells 6 3 0 3 6 4 0 4 umap 1 9876543210 10 11 fe cells a b 0 h 2 h 4 h 6 h 8 h 10 h 12 h 14 h 16 h 18 h 20 h 22 h 24 h cluster fe cells z score 1 0 1 24 h 22 h 20 h 18 h 16 h 14 h 12 h 10 h 8 h 6 h 4 h 2 h 0 h fe+ cells cluster e f 9876543210 10 11 9876543210 10 11 c d fe+ cells fe cells figure 3.(supports figure 3).supplemental figure 3.]
Summary: Trajectory analysis reveals diurnal phase patterns in clusters of cells under different conditions, reflecting rhythmic gene expression.

Text 343
10.1038/s42003-020-01625-6
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 5 single-cell myeloid characterization in ccrcc. a umap subclustering of myeloid cells (original clusters 4, 6, 10, 13, 15, and 20). b umap distribution of single cells by tissue type with relative percent of cells by tissue in each cluster. c percent of cells expressing selected markers for myeloid and macrophage markers. p values derived from one-way anova testing. d proportion of assigned cell types compared to total antigen presenting cells by tissue type. e macrophage subclusters: tumor-associated macrophage 1 (tam_1) (n = 1262), tam_2 (n = 840), tam_3 (n = 594), peripheral macrophage (pm) (n = 275), and resident macrophage (rm) (n = 194) with relative and absolute percent of cells by tissue in each cluster. f top differential expression markers for macrophage subclusters. g macrophage umap overlaid with slingshot-based36 cell trajectories starting at rm and tam_2 and proceeding into pm. smaller umap shows pseudotime created by the cell trajectories. h z-transformed normalized enrichment scores from ssgsea for selected gene sets by subcluster.']. Reference sentences:[with the previous observation of an overall increase in macrophages and decreased monocytes in the inte- grated umap (fig 1e) we next focused on differential analyses of the myeloid populations (fig 5a).across monocytes macro- phages and dendritic cells subclustering found 20 distinct clusters (fig 5a).tissue-specific distribution was observed with the majority tumor-infiltrating myeloid cells in subclusters 0 3 7 8 and 15 (fig 5b).populations were assigned using canonical markers and in addition to the previously described singler approach with macrophage subclusters (0 3 7 13 and 14) identified using markers such as cd1c clec10a (cd301) fcer1a and msr1 (fig 5c).in total we observed a decreased proportion in cd14+ monocytes in tissue-infiltrating myeloid cells compared to peripheral blood and an increase in macro- phages (fig 5d).normal renal parenchyma had a variable increase in cd14− cd16− monocytes which was not significant (fig 5d).next we isolated the five macrophage subclusters relabeling them tumor-associated macrophage 1 (tam_1) tam_2 tam_3 resident macrophage (rm) and peripheral macrophage (pm) based on the relative percent of cells derived from the respective tissue (fig 5e).for example the cd88high (c5ar1) cd54+ (icam1) tam_1 expressed increased levels of chemokines and cytokines like ccl3 ccl4 cxcl2 and il10; cd64high (fcgr1a) cd16high (fcgr3a) tam_2 subcluster expressed the apolipoprotein gene apoe lysosomal lipase (lipa) and ferroportin (slc40a1); and cd1chigh cd86+ tam_3 had high levels of il1r2 and langerhin (cd207) a marker of the skin-resident langerhans cells (fig 5f).like the cd8+ t cells we built cell trajectories based on varied genes and found two distinct curves converging into tam_3 and pm (fig 5g).in order to assess potential functional differences for the macrophages we performed gene set enrichment analysis (fig 5h).across the three tam subclusters modest enrichment in both type 1 and type 2 ifn signaling was observed (fig 5h).the non-tam subclusters rm and pm had relatively lower levels of enrichment with the exception of proinﬂammatory signaling and glycolysis respectively (fig 5h).we also found an increase in antigen processing and presentation of lipid antigens via mhc-i in tam_2 and tam_3 while tam_1 had higher enrichment for polysaccharide antigens (supplementary fig 5).our analysis demonstrated distinct cd16+ myeloid population derived within tumor compared to peripheral blood or normal renal parenchyma and an overall increase in tumor-associated macrophages (fig 5a d).m2 markers like cd163 and cd204 have been associated with poor clinical outcomes in ccrcc1851 and were the highest in the tam_1 and tam_2 subclusters (fig 5g).this is despite no clear identification of canonical m1 or m2 macrophages subclusters (fig 5h).across the myeloid subclustering there was gene enrichment for mhc class i processing and presentation machinery in the dc subsets while the macrophages had increased mhc class ii enrichment (supplementary fig 5).]
Cell trajectories show differentiation paths from resident macrophages to peripheral macrophages, with distinct gene expression patterns along the trajectory.

Text 344
10.1038/s42003-020-01625-6
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 3 cd8+ t cells in ccrcc tumors exhibit a transcriptional continuum with distinct populations. a umap subclustering of cd8+ t cells (original clusters 1, 8, 9, and 17). b umap distribution of single cells by tissue type with relative and absolute percent of cells by tissue in each cluster. c cell-cycle regression assignments for cd8+ t cells by cluster assignment. d percent of cells expressing selected markers for t-cell biology. e cd8+ umap of clusters (upper panel) and clonotype frequency (lower panel) overlaid with slingshot-based36 cell trajectory starting at cd8_4 and proceeding into five distinct curves: branch 1 (b1), b2, b3, b4, and b5. f clonotype overlap coefficients between subclusters. g z-transformed normalized enrichment scores from ssgsea for selected gene sets by subcluster. h normalized enrichment scores for therapeutic response or lack of response to anti-pd-1 therapy across the cd8+ t cells (upper panel) and by pseudotime of each branch (lower panel).']. Reference sentences:[subclustering of cd8+ t cells revealed eight distinct clusters (fig 3a) with relative tissue- specific distribution (fig 3b).only clusters cd8_2 and cd8_4 had increased relative levels of peripheral-blood cells (fig 3b).we next examined the variation in pro- liferative gene signatures finding a similar distribution to the tissue-type with increasing cells in s or g2m phases from right to left peaking with cluster cd8_6 (fig 3c).in order to better characterize the cd8+ clusters we used canonical and differential t cells markers to examine gene expression differences along the umap (fig 3d) with several patterns.the first pattern was the discovery of a naïve ccr7+ sell+ tcf7+ being seen in cd8_4 (fig 3d).looking for effector cd8+ t cells we next observed two populations of ifng+ prf1+ t cells principally in cd8_1 and cd8_0 (fig 3d).the latter also expressed immune checkpoints such as ctla4 havcr2 pdcd1 and tigit (fig 3d).these immune checkpoints were expressed at more moderate levels in both cd8_5 and cd8_6; however cd8_6 exclusively expressed a number of proliferation markers such as cdk1 mki67 stmn1 and top2a (fig 3d).in order to examine gene expression patterns above single or selected genes we used slingshot36 to build minimum spanning trees between subclusters generating curves based on the most varied genes (fig 3e).with the exception of b1 extending into cd8_2 the remaining curves graphed along a similar trajectory with a common node of cd8_1 and branching at distinct clusters with increased levels of tumor-infiltrating cd8+ t cells (fig 3e).these curves also varied by cd8+ t clonotypes based on tcr sequencing with the root having no clonal expansion and the b3 b4 and b5 curves terminating into regions with higher levels of clonal expansion compared to b1 or b2 (fig 3e).this clonotype relationship was also observed in specific clonotype sequences with overlapping clonotypes seen in subclusters cd8_0 cd8_6 cd8_5 and cd8_3 (fig 3f).in contrast cd8_7 had minimal overlapping clonotypes with other subclusters (fig 3f).this relationship was seen also independent of the individual patient sequenced (supplementary fig 3).in order to assess possible functional differences based on these branching we performed gene set enrichment analysis (fig 3g)37.as expected based on the immune checkpoint inhibitors expression (fig 3d) clusters cd8_0 and cd8_5 showed increased terminal differentiation and exhaustion (fig 3g).cytolytic gene enrichment was seen in cd8_1 the prf1+ ifng+ population lacking immune check- points (fig 3g).the highly proliferative cd8_6 population was enriched for metabolic activity such as the tricarboxylic acid cycle and glycolysis and dna repair (fig 3g).the b2 curve termination cluster cd8_7 has preferential enrichment of cytokine signaling such as il-2/stat5 tgfβ and type 1 ifn (fig 3g).with immune checkpoint inhibitor responsiveness associated with distinct cd8+ t-cell populations22 we next examined enrichment of signatures associated with response or nonresponse to anti-pd-1 therapies (fig 3h).this approach found an overall enrichment in gene expression associated with responsiveness to anti-pd-1 at the terminal points of curve b2 and midpoints of b3 b4 and b5 corresponding to cells in cd8_1 (fig 3h blue lines).likewise we observed an overall increase in gene expression associated with no response or progression on anti-pd-1 therapy at the terminal points of curves b3 b4 and b5 (fig 3h red lines).we found that the blood cd8+ t cells are non-heterogeneous and poorly reﬂect tumor-infiltrating cd8+ t-cell transcriptional profiles (fig 3a d).organizing the structure of the cd8+ t-cell manifold we found four distinct branches that may represent transcriptional states upon tumor infiltration two associated with a pd-1+ tim- 3+ exhausted subcluster a proliferative subcluster and a fourth with the higher levels of cytokine signaling (fig 3e g).]
Patterns related to trajectory in single-cell transcriptomics include distinct cell clusters, tissue-specific distribution, cell-cycle regression, gene expression differences, cell trajectory curves, clonotype overlap, gene set enrichment, and therapeutic response analysis.

Text 345
10.1038/s42003-020-01625-6
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 4 single-cell cd4+ t-cell characterization within ccrcc. a umap subclustering of cd4+ t cells (original clusters 4, 6, 10, 13, 15, and 20). b umap distribution of single cells by tissue type with relative and absolute percent of cells by tissue in each cluster. c percent of cells expressing selected markers for t-cell biology. d cd4+ umap of subclusters (upper panel) and clonotype frequency (lower panel) overlaid with slingshot-based36 cell trajectory starting from cd4_1 (root 1) and cd4_3 (root 2) with relative pseudotime for all curves calculated using slingshot. e occupied repertoire space for cd4+ subclusters. f top ten markers for ti-predominant cd4+ subclusters. size of points are relative to percent of cells in the subcluster expressing the indicated mrna species. g z-transformed normalized enrichment scores from ssgsea for selected gene sets by subcluster.']. Reference sentences:[subclustering of cd4+ t cells revealed nine distinct clusters (fig 4a) with a similar pattern—as seen in cd8 t cells—of tissue distribution with predominantly peripheral-blood cd4+ t cells on the right leading to tissue- infiltrating cd4+ t cells on the left (fig 4b).like the cd8+ t cells we next examined the canonical and differential t-cell markers along the umap (fig 4c).the first pattern that emerged was a naive ccr7+ sell+ tcf7+ being seen in cd4_1 and cd4_3 (fig 4c).within the tumor-infiltrating cd4_4 cluster we observed increased expression of the th1 driver tbx21 (t-bet) activation marker lag3 and nr4a2 and cytokine expression (fig 4c).constructing the cell trajectory curves based on the cd4+ subclustering we observed two root points of the ccr7+ sell+ tcf7+ clusters cd4_1 and cd4_3 leading to a common cd4_4 termination (fig 4d).unlike the other cd4+ t cells the curve generated for tregs was divergent starting at cd4_5 through cd4_7 and into cd4_4 (fig 4d).in addition compared to the cd8+ subclustering modest clonal expansion was seen in cd4_4 and cd4_5 and was not a clear pattern for cell trajectory (fig 4e).upregulated within the tumor- infiltrating cd4+ t cells were heat shock proteins (hspa1a and hspa1b) jun and fos constituents (fos jun and junb) mhc-ii molecules (hla-drb) and secreted molecules (ccl5 gzma and gzmk) (fig 4f).several of the upregulated genes are shared across all the tumor-predominant cd4 clusters (fig 4f); however each cluster also had unique expression markers.both cd4_2 and cd4_4 had increased levels of ifng (fig 4f) but cd4_2 was enriched for heat shock proteins while cd4_4 had a cytotoxic component and there was expression of cd8a which likely represents modest contamination of cd8+ t cells (fig 4f).the cd4_6 cluster had increased expres- sion of the il-6 cytokine osm6 and areg and socs3 downstream of interleukin signaling (fig 4f).the differential expression closely matched the pathway analysis with cd4_4 enriched for cytolytic and type i ifn signaling (fig 4g).the cd4_5 and cd4_7 treg cluster had preferential enrichment for metabolic pathways with high levels of terminal differentiation in tumor-infiltrated cd4_5 (fig 4g).the osmhigh cd4_6 was enriched for il-6/jak/stat3 signaling and inﬂammatory response genes (fig 4g).as previously seen we found a small number of dc (subclusters 15 16 and 19) with distinct expression profiles associated with conventional dc1 (cdc1) plasmacytoid dc (pdc) and monocyte-derived dcs (modc) respectively (sup- plementary fig 4).]
Patterns of cell trajectory and differentiation within CD4+ T-cell subclusters, with distinct expression markers and pathways.

Text 346
10.1038/s41467-021-21043-4
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 3 expression profile and development of treg cells. a violin plots showed the il2r (left panel), inhibitory (middle panel), and co-stimulatory (right panel) scores for each treg cell cluster (n = 11,631). box plots inside the violins indicated the quartiles of corresponding score levels. endpoints depict minimum and maximum values; centre lines denote median values; whiskers denote 1.5× the interquartile range; black dots denote each cell. violin plots are coloured according to cell types, and signature scores are indicated at the y-axis. b heatmap showed the selected signalling pathways (rows) that were significantly enriched in go and kegg analyses for each treg cell cluster (columns). filled colours from blue to red represent scaled expression levels (normalised −log10p values) from low to high. p values were calculated by one-sided hypergeometric test and adjusted for multiple comparisons. orange and purple squares on the left column represent the results derived from go and kegg signalling pathways analysis, respectively. c pseudotime trajectory analysis of treg cells (treg_c1, treg_c2, treg_c3, and treg_c4; n = 11,631) with high variable genes. each dot represents one single cell, coloured according to its cluster label. the inlet plot showed each cell with a pseudotime score from dark blue to yellow, indicating early and terminal states, respectively. d box plots showed the expansion- (top panel) and migration-index (bottom panel) scores of each cd4+ t cell cluster (n = 10). comparison was made using two-sided wilcoxon test. cell clusters are indicated at the x-axis, and the y-axis shows the expansion- or migration-index at the top or bottom panel, respectively. endpoints depict minimum and maximum values; centre lines denote median values; whiskers denote 1.5× the interquartile range; coloured dots denote each patient. e box plots showed the transition-index scores of treg_c4_tnfrsf4 (left panel) and treg_c2_hspa1a (right panel) with other treg cells (n = 10). comparison was made using two-sided kruskal-wallis test. cell clusters and the transition-index scores are indicated at the x- and y-axis, respectively. endpoints depict minimum and maximum values; centre lines denote median values; whiskers denote 1.5× the interquartile range; coloured dots denote each patient.']. Reference sentences:[we observed no sharing of any identical tcr clonotype among different patients with npc although they had certain preferences of v and j fragments as well as v–j pairs (supplementary fig 3a b).moreover we observed that both cd4+ and cd8+ t cells have more clonal t cells which are derived from identical tcr clonotypes and consistent with a previous study17 in the tumours compared to the pbmc suggesting the clonal expansion of certain dominant clones of tumour infiltrating t cells upon continuous stimulations by tumour antigens (supplementary fig 3c).we observed the highest il2r score for treg_c4_tnfrsf4 among all treg clusters (fig 3a) sug- gesting the strongest il-2 binding potential treg_c4_tnfrsf4 cells.similarly we also observed the highestof inhibitory and co-stimulatory scores for treg_c4_tnfrsf4 cells based on their expression levels of genes with immune-inhibitory functions and co-stimulatory receptors respectively (fig 3a and supplementary fig 5a) suggesting that treg_c4_tnfrsf4 cells had a stronger suppression potential on immune response and were much activated than the other treg cells.particularly the ‘cytokine-cytokine receptor interaction’ was highly enriched in treg_c4_tnfrsf4 (fig 3b) consistent with their chemotactic potentials as mentioned earlier.moreover the ‘interleukin-10 production’ ‘tnf signalling pathway’ and ‘nf-κb signalling pathway’ were enriched in both treg_c4_tnfrsf4 and treg_c2_hspa1a (fig 3b).to trace the origin of intratumoral treg cells we first performed pseudotime trajectory analysis using monocle2 which revealed the most terminal status with the highest pseudotime scores for treg_c4_tnfrsf4 cells and two developmental trajectories of treg_c4_tnfrsf4 cells from treg_c1_sell cells in pbmc and treg_c3_mki67 cells in tumours (fig 3c).given that the majority of treg_c2_hspa1a cells was in tumours and originated from treg_c1_sell cells according to the pseudotime trajectory analysis (fig 3c) the scarce expression of the resident markers might suggest the most recent recruit- ment of treg_c2_hspa1a cells from peripheral blood.consistently we observed that treg_c4_tnfrsf4 had the highest expansion score meaning the highest degree of clonal expansion among the treg cell clusters (fig 3d).we also observed the highest migration score meaning the highest mobility for treg_c1_sell derived from the pbmc (fig 3d).we observed that treg_c4_tnfrsf4 cells had the highest transition mobility with treg_c3_mki67 cells followed by treg_c2_hspa1a and treg_c1_sell cells; and treg_c2_hspa1a cells had high transition mobility with treg_c4_tnfrsf4 and treg_c3_mki67 cells (fig 3e).these observations again supported the developmental trajectory of intratumoral treg_c4_tnfrsf4 cells from naïve treg_c1_sell cells through intermediate treg_c2_hspa1a or treg_c3_mki67 cells (fig 3c).]
Summary: Trajectory analysis revealed developmental paths of Treg cells, with distinct expansion, migration, and transition patterns, indicating cellular dynamics and differentiation processes.

Text 347
10.1002/advs.202004320
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 4. lineage tracing of cscs and epcs. a) single-cell trajectories by monocle analysis showing the development of the “epithelial lineage” cells. the distance from a cell to the root corresponds to pseudotime. branched trajectories are plotted as a 2d tree layout. b) expression of known epithelial markers epcam and e-cadherin with pseudotime. the lines with blue represent the epithelial branch. each point corresponds to a single cell, and each color represents subpopulation. c) gene expression levels in single cells ordered along the pseudotime axis for csc markers, stemness and cell cycle related genes. cells are color-coded by subpopulation. the lines indicate local polynomial regression smoothing. d) distribution of stemness score, cycling cells, and predicted telomerase score with pseudotime exhibit continuous pattern. the color key represents the score levels by a gradient.']. Reference sentences:[re- markably monocle ordering of cscs epcs_a and epcs_b using all detected genes revealed a trajectory that started from the rest- ing csc stage and diﬀerentiated into the two subtypes of epcs indicating gene expression dynamics that recapitulate activation of cscs (figure 4a).the stem- ness genes (e.g. cd133 lgr5 alcam klf4 and prox1) were decreased during this transition process along pseudotime path while the markers of the cell cycle (e.g. pcna ccnd1 and ccnd2) were increasingly expressed (figure 4c).in addi- tion consistent with the above data of individual gene the stem- ness score decreased from cscs to epcs_b cells while the num- ber of cycling cells increased (figure 4d).this conclusion is supported by the lineage tracing anal- ysis (figure 4) whereas other epcs without evident mutations look more like normal epcs.]
Summary: Trajectory analysis reveals differentiation from stem cells to epithelial cells, with changes in stemness and cell cycle genes along pseudotime.

Text 348
10.1016/j.cell.2021.02.018
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure s7. supporting data for critical juncture analysis, related to figures 5 and 6 (a) similar to figure 3a, but here showing gsea results for assessing the differences of delta between disease severity groups (dsm-high versus dsm-low) between the days 17-23 time window and the period before (tso < day 17). see table s4f for detailed results of these selected gene sets and the entire set that passed the adjusted p value cutoff of 0.2. (b) time course of blood neutrophil and monocyte counts in recovered and deceased groups. corresponding range of hcs are shown with green dotted lines. longitudinal samples from the same individual are connected by gray lines. trajectories were fitted to recovered and deceased groups separately with the shaded areas representing standard error. (c) effect size comparison of dsm-high versus dsm-low (cite-seq cohort) and deceased versus recovered (critical patients with distinct outcome subcohorts – see figure 6a) at the days 17-23 period. effect sizes were derived from the coefficients of the group comparison term in mixed-effect models. proteins are colored by whether they were significantly different (with an unadjusted p value of less than or equal to 0.05) in the deceased versus recovered (‘‘outcome’’) and the dsm-high versus -low comparisons (‘‘dsm’’). see also table s7 for the full list of de proteins. (d) similar to (c). effect size comparison of brescia deceased versus recovered and an independent us cohort (yale cohort) (lucas et al., 2020) deceased versus recovered patients (see star methods) for 38 overlapping circulating proteins/cytokines at the juncture period (tso days 17-23). proteins in red are those significantly different between the deceased and recovered patient groups in the brescia cohort (unadjusted anova p value < 0.05).']. Reference sentences:[]
Summary: Trajectories of cell changes in different groups over time, comparing gene expression differences between disease severity and outcome groups.

Text 349
10.1016/j.cell.2021.02.018
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 5. analyses of timing effects suggest a late immune response juncture (a) time course of monocyte subset frequencies in dsm-low and dsm-high groups. classical monocyte is expressed as fraction of total pbmcs; the cd163hi classical monocyte subset is expressed as a fraction of classical monocytes. the median cell frequency of age- and gender-matched hcs is shown as a green dotted line. individual samples are shown as dots and longitudinal samples from the same individual are connected by gray lines. p values shown are from mixed effect linear models indicating the statistical significance of the timing effect (i.e., tso) accounting for age and experimental batch in dsm-low and dsm-high groups, respectively. trajectories (using loess smoothing) were fitted to dsm-low and dsm-high groups separately. tso = days 17–23 period is highlighted with purple. (b) similar to (a) but showing the absolute blood neutrophil and monocyte counts. the two green dotted lines mark the approximate reference range of cell counts in healthy adults. the shaded areas around trajectories denote standard error. (c) effect size (normalized enrichment score from gsea) comparison of the period before day 17 (tso <day 17, green) and during the tso = days 17–23 period (purple) for inﬂammatory related gene sets. effect sizes correspond to differences between dsm-high versus dsm-low groups (e.g., effect size <0 corresponds to the gene signature being less enriched in the dsm-high group than dsm-low group). p values shown are fdr adjusted (via the benjamini-hochberg method) from the test reﬂecting the temporal changes in the difference between dsm-high and dsm-low groups from before the day 17 period to the days 17–23 time window (see star methods). (d) similar to figure 3a, but showing gsea results for assessing differences between the dsm-high versus dsm-low groups using only samples from days 17–23 since symptom onset. see table s4e for detailed results of these selected gene sets and all sets that passed the adjusted p value cutoff of 0.2. (e) time course of gene set signature scores of inﬂammatory related gene sets in dsm-low and dsm-high patient groups in cd56dimcd16hi nk cells and classical monocytes. the gene set signature scores were calculated using the le genes identified from the enrichment analysis shown in (c) above to highlight differences between the dsm-high versus dsm-low groups during the days 17–23 period. the median score of age- and gender-matched hcs is shown as a green dotted line. the shaded areas around trajectories denote standard error. (f) time course of serum protein levels from dsm-low and dsm-high patients, respectively. similar to (e). top 4 serum proteins significantly different between dsm-high versus dsm-low groups during the days 17–23 period are shown. see table s6 for the full list of differentially expressed proteins. see also figure s7 and tables s4 and s6.']. Reference sentences:[consistent with an earlier report (lucas et al. 2020) the frequency of classical monocytes and its cd163hi subset increased in both patient groups over time and peaked around day 20 (figure 5a).the same was true for absolute monocyte and neutrophil counts in blood (figure 5b).we detected several statistically significant ‘‘ﬂips’’ for example in- ﬂammatory signatures in cd56dimcd16hi nk cells and classical monocytes were lower in dsm-high patients before day 17 but rose to be higher than the dsm-low patients by days 17–23 (figure 5c).we then assessed differences between the dsm- high and dsm-low groups during days 17–23 (figure 5d; table s4e).in addition to cd56dimcd16hi nk cells and classical mono- cytes the nf-kb gene signature was elevated in non-classical monocytes other nk cell subsets mucosal-associated invariant t (mait) cells and memory and naive b cells in dsm-high compared to dsm-low patients (figure 5d).the inﬂammation ll 1846 cell 184 1836–1857 april 1 2021 article a d b c e f figure 5.heightened sig- nals of cellular activation and proliferation were also detected such as cell-cycle signatures in cd8+ memory t cells (figure 5d; table s4e).as seen above (figure 5b) blood monocyte and neutrophil counts also peaked around day 20 in these patients (figure s7b).these were consistent with the dsm-high versus -low comparison (figure 5f; table s7) with 45/63 proteins showing the same direction of change between the deceased versus recovered patients as that between dsm-high versus dsm- low groups (p = 0.0896 fisher’s exact test; figure s7c) sug- gesting that the inﬂammatory divergences between patients of high versus low disease severity were qualitatively similar to those between critical patients with distinct survival outcomes.as observed earlier in the dsm-high versus dsm-low patients (figure 5f) markers of inﬂammation and immune responses (e.g. il-6 tnfrsf1b and il-17) were increasing at a higher rate or persisting (e.g. il-18) at an elevated level in the deceased group (figure 6d).]
Patterns related to trajectory analysis of immune response timing effects in different patient groups, including changes in monocyte subsets, inflammatory gene sets, and serum protein levels.

Text 350
10.1016/j.cell.2021.02.018
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 6. divergence of deceased and recovered patients at the late juncture (a) approach for assessing and validating the late immune response juncture hypothesis by using serum protein profiles of critical ill patients with either recovery or deceased outcomes. (b) effect size plots of circulating serum proteins comparing the difference between critical deceased versus recovered patients before (days 7–16), during (days 17–23), and after (days 24–30) the juncture period. mixed effect models were fitted to assess whether this difference between deceased and recovered groups changed significantly between (1) pre-juncture and juncture (top panel showing effect sizes in each period and its right bar plots showing the p value assessing the temporal difference), or (2) pre-juncture and after the juncture (bottom panel). the size of the circle denotes the statistical significance of the difference between deceased and recovered groups in the indicated period (p < 0.05 is marked by solid outlines). see also table s7. (c) outcome prediction performance (recovered versus fatal) at (17–23 days; purple) or post (24–30 days; blue) juncture using leave-one-out cross-validation. feature selection was performed using the same procedure that identified proteins shown in (b). area under the curve (auc) and permutation p values are shown. (d) similar to figure 6f but showing serum protein levels of critical ill patients with recovered or deceased outcomes (see a). trajectories (using loess smoothing) were fitted to the recovered versus deceased patient groups separately. top proteins showing the largest temporal shifts in their differences between the deceased versus recovered patients in (b) are shown. (e) similar to (d) but for antibody measurements against sars-cov-2 spike and nucleocapsid proteins in critically ill patients with recovered or deceased outcomes. lu, light unit. see also figure s7 and tables s4, s6, and s7.']. Reference sentences:[divergences at the juncture predict fatal covid-19 we next hypothesized that the immune statuses and trajectories at the juncture period are also divergent between the critically ill patients with distinct survival outcomes (figure 6a).we thus searched for proteins that were de between the patient groups during (days 17–23) or after the juncture (days 24–30 ‘‘post-juncture’’) and also required that the differences between the deceased and recov- ered patients changed significantly over time between the pre- juncture (days 7–16) and juncture or between the pre- and post-juncture periods (figure 6a).we found 12 proteins that satisfied these search criteria (figure 6b) (all p < 0.05 and overall fdr = 14% based on a permutation test [i.e. =2 proteins are expected to be false positives]) and are predictive of fatal outcomes based on cross-validation machine learning analysis (figure 6c).several markers of tissue inﬂammation or damage started to increase more at the juncture in the deceased cohort such as e-selectin a marker of endothelial inﬂammation/ leukocyte transmigration and lipocalin-2/ngal which is known to be associated with acute kidney injury and innate immune response to bacterial infections (flo et al. 2004; haase et al. 2009) (figure 6d).consistent with the ifn-i signatures above (fig- ures 3d 3e s3a and s3b) ip-10 an ifn-stimulated protein product was decreasing prior to the juncture with a steeper decline in the recovered cohort to reach lower levels than the deceased group by day 20 (figure 6d).as observed earlier in the dsm-high versus dsm-low patients (figure 5f) markers of inﬂammation and immune responses (e.g. il-6 tnfrsf1b and il-17) were increasing at a higher rate or persisting (e.g. il-18) at an elevated level in the deceased group (figure 6d).how- ever antibody responses to both the sars-cov-2 spike and nucleocapsid appeared slower in the deceased compared to the recovered cohorts (figure 6e) consistent with the delay and potential miscoordination of antigen-specific adaptive immune responses in the most severe patients (rydyznski moderbacher et al. 2020).in contrast sars-cov-2 infections often have asymptomatic upper respiratory infections early (matheson and lehner 2020) but more than 90% of cases displayed signs of ll 1848 cell 184 1836–1857 april 1 2021 article a b d e c figure 6.as described in the following sections and the main text a subset of 60 unique patients including 33 patients who had peripheral immune cells collected and 38 critically ill patients with deceased or recovery outcomes (for circulating protein/ cytokine-based validation of the ‘‘critical juncture’’ concept in figure 6) were analyzed in this study (i.e. 7 recovered and 4 deceased patients also had pbmcs collected).a subset of the 12 proteins that were 1) significantly different between the two patient groups at the juncture or post-juncture based on model 1 and 2) significantly shifted temporally based on model 2 are shown in figure 6b with select protein trajectories shown in figure 6d.based on these sample scores classification performance was measured by the area under the receiver operating characteristic (roc) curve (figure 6c).time trajectories for the same cohort of recovered and deceased patients were created using all the measurements of the 12 temporally divergent proteins (figure 6d).the same was done also for antibody measurements against sars-cov-2 spike and nucleocapsid proteins (figure 6e) (burbelo et al. 2020).(c) effect size comparison of dsm-high versus dsm-low (cite-seq cohort) and deceased versus recovered (critical patients with distinct outcome subcohorts – see figure 6a) at the days 17-23 period.]
Patterns related to trajectory predict fatal outcomes in critically ill patients with distinct survival outcomes.

Text 351
10.1038/s41592-021-01060-3
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 3 | integrative analysis of chromatin states at promoters and gene expression across mouse brain cell types. a, heatmap showing the transcript levels of genes with detected matched histone modification profiles for each mouse brain cell type. cell types are indicated with colored dots below and the colors of the dots are the same as in fig 1d. b,c, heatmaps showing the matched chromatin accessibility (b) and histone modification (c) levels for the promoters of corresponding genes in a. genes were grouped using k-means clustering based on both expression and histone modification levels of h3k27ac, h3k27me3 and h3k9me3. d, representative top enriched go terms for genes in each category of a. e, umap embedding showing the trajectory of ogc maturation. each dot represents a single nucleus and is colored by pseudotime. f, heatmaps showing the gene expression levels, promoter histone modification levels and promoter chromatin accessibility of differentially expressed genes along the pseudotime. fc neu, frontal cortex neurons; hc neu, hippocampus neurons; in neu, inhibitory neurons; nonneu, non-neurons.']. Reference sentences:[we clustered these nuclei into 22 cell groups based on their transcriptome profiles and assigned them to seven cortical neuron types (snap25+ satb2+ gad1−) four hippocampal neuron types (snap25+ slc17a7+ or prox1+) three inhibitory neuron types (gad1/gad2+) and eight non-neuron cell types (snap25−) including oligodendrocyte precursor cells (opcs) two groups of oligodendrocytes (ogcs) two groups of astrocytes (ascs) microglia and endothelial and ependymal cells (fig 1d–f extended data fig 3a–c and supplementary table 3).we also compared our transcriptomic profiles with previously published scrna-seq datasets from the same brain regions (reference data- set)36 and found excellent agreement (extended data fig 3d–g).some of the subclusters here matched multiple subclusters of the reference dataset which includes: the frontal cor- tex (fc) l5 and l6 matched with teglu10 and 20; the fc l2/3 and l4 matched teglu7 and 8; and the hippocampus (hc) cornu ammonis (ca) 1 and subiculum clusters in our datasets fell into two ca1 neuron groups (teglu21/24 and teglu23) of the reference dataset (extended data fig 3e).for fair comparisons we first performed independent cell cluster- ing based on transcriptomic profiles for each paired-tag dataset (extended data fig 3b).using k-means clustering we categorized these gene promoters into seven groups with distinct combinations of histone modification: class i promoters were associated with the hetero- chromatin mark h3k9me3 (13.1% of all tested genes) class ii-a and ii-b groups were associated with the polycomb repressive histone mark h3k27me3 (9.2% of all tested genes) and the remaining four groups of promoters were associated with variable levels of active histone marks h3k4me1 and h3k27ac (77.6% of all tested genes) (fig 3a–c extended data fig 5a–c and supplementary table 4).we carried out gene ontology (go) analysis and found dis- tinct functional categories of genes within each group (fig 3d and supplementary table 5).these genes were enriched for go terms with more specific cel- lular processes: for example hippocampal neuron-expressed genes were enriched for learning or memory and microglia-expressed genes were enriched for inflammatory response (fig 3d and supplementary table 5).we also carried out pseudotime analysis on ogc lineages based on the transcriptome profile and assigned the promoter chromatin states to the differentially expressed genes (fig 3e extended data fig 5gh and methods).the chromatin accessibilities and densities of active chromatin marks (h3k4me1 h3k4me3 and h3k27ac) are concordant with expression levels of these genes (fig 3f).these genes are enriched in those with functions in development processes (fig 3c and extended data fig 5f).f heatmap showing the enrichments of predicted targeted genes of each promoter group defined in fig 3a linked by ccres of each cre group defined in fig 4. g sccs between read densities of ccres and promoters of putative target genes across cell types for h3k27ac and h3k27me3.each group was then subjected to secondary k-means clustering based on gene expression resulting in the seven promoter groups in fig 3.]
Summary: Trajectory of cell maturation based on gene expression, histone modification, and chromatin accessibility patterns in different cell types.

Text 352
10.1038/s41588-021-00801-6
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 2 | reproducible variation in differentiation trajectories. a, box plots display the proportions of each cell type at day 52 across cell lines. the sum of the proportions of da and sert cells at day 52 is defined as neuronal differentiation efficiency. in the box plots, the middle line is the median, and the lower and upper edges of the box denote the first and third quartiles. astro, astrocyte-like; epen1, ependymal-like 1; fpp, floor plate progenitors; p_fpp, proliferating floor plate progenitors; u_neur1, unknown neuron 1. b, left, hierarchical clustering of (cell line, pool) combinations by neuronal differentiation (diff.) efficiency. displayed are data from ten pools with at least ten scrna-seq profiles across all time points (138 lines). the first bar indicates a line’s pool of origin; the second bar indicates the replicate status. right, uniform manifold approximation and projections (umaps), highlighting the distributions of cells on day 52 for two selected cell lines with low (hpsi0514i-fiaj_1, sea green) and high (hpsi1213i-hehd_1, dark blue) neuronal differentiation efficiencies. c, workflow for scrna-seq analysis of ipsc-derived cerebral organoids. umaps summarize the resulting cell populations (1, floor plate progenitors; 2, proliferating floor plate progenitors; 3, neuroblasts; 4, das; 5, serts; 6, proliferating serts; 7, astrocyte-like; 8, ependymal-like 1; 9, ependymal-like 2; 10, unknown neurons 1; 11, unknown neurons 2; 12, unknown neurons 3; a, neurons; b, intermediate progenitors; c, radial glial progenitors; d, satellite cells; e, mesenchymal cells; f, myotube; g, paired box (pax)7+ cells; h, wnt+ cells; 2d, two-dimensional; 3d, three-dimensional). d, scatterplot of neuronal differentiation efficiency between replicate pools (n=32 cell lines differentiated in two different pools). the two cell lines from b are highlighted. e, umaps of the two cell lines selected in b, making non-brain and brain cell types in the organoid study. f, scatterplot of midbrain dopaminergic neuronal differentiation (x axis) versus neuronal differentiation efficiency measured in organoid differentiation (y axis) for a common subset of 12 ipsc lines. the two cell lines from b are highlighted. in d,f, locally estimated scatterplot smoothing (loess) curves and 95% confidence intervals are shown alongside pearson’s r and the p value from a two-sided t-test.']. Reference sentences:[immunochemistry confirmed that cells differentiated either in pools or individually both expressed protein markers associated with patterning of das (lim homeobox tran- scription factor 1 α (lmx1a) forkhead box (fox)a2 and tyrosine hydroxylase (th)) (supplementary fig 2).we observed substantial variation in the proportions of cell types produced by different ipsc lines at each time point (fig 2a extended data fig 2a and supplementary table 2).principal component analysis of cell type fractions per line and pool identified the proportion of das and serts on day 52 as the largest axis of variation (principal component 1 47% variance extended data fig 2b–d).as da and sert cells are derived from similar progenitor populations in vivo33 we considered the com- bined proportion of these cell types on day 52 as a measure of ‘neuronal differentiation efficiency’ for each ipsc line (fig 2b).nevertheless although cell lines were pooled at similar numbers we observed extensive variation throughout our experiment in the numbers of cells produced by dif- ferent lines (fig 2a).rows (that is cell line pool combinations) were hierarchically clustered according to their euclidean distance (as in fig 2b).]
Variation in neuronal differentiation efficiency across different cell lines.

Text 353
10.1038/s41422-021-00479-9
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 6 pseudo-time analysis reveals the gene expression changes and functional adaptation during cldn9+ neuron type-switch. a singlecell trajectory shows the fates of cldn9+ neurons after sni. two branches were identified, one led to atf3+/gfra3+/gal+ neurons from cldn9+ neurons (fate1, f1), the other remained as it was (f2). the color indicates the time points after sni (top) or represents neuron clusters (bottom). b gene signatures during cldn9+ neuron switch. the degs (rows) are shown using heatmap (left) with neurons (columns) in pseudotime from root to f1. gene-expression trends in each group (middle). go terms associated with degs in the four kinetic clusters (right). c heatmaps show the degs identified by beam (rows), and cells (columns) are shown in pseudo-time from root to f1.']. Reference sentences:[nerve injury-induced dynamic gene regulation based on single- cell trajectories to identify the dynamic gene regulation in three sni-induced neuron clusters we performed the pseudo-time analysis to reconstruct the single-cell trajectories.181930 the reconstructed tree reﬂected the neuron fate and the change of gene expression during sni (fig 6a b; supplementary information fig s10a–d).the degs in the switching process of cldn9+ neurons were classified into 5 gene modules according to the expressing patterns across pseudo-time (fig 6b).notably the genes related to sensory perception of pain were decreased (fig 6b c).these enriched genes in sensory perception of pain mostly were related to pain transduction including trpv1 scn9a scn10a and scn11a.3132 comparatively the expression of genes associated with inﬂam- matory responses was increased (fig 6b c).the genes enriched in inﬂammatory response related to pathological pain included csf1 and fam19a4.3334 the regulated genes included the tfs cytokines and related molecules (including receptors ligands suppressors and induced or regulated proteins) gprotein-coupled receptors (gpcrs) ion channels and growth factors and their receptors (fig 6c; supplementary information table s5).atf3 sox11 sprr1a and gap43 were functionally associated with the axon regeneration.5 csf1 was induced in sniic1–3 neurons (fig 6c; supplementary information fig s11b) and played a role in neuropathic pain by activating the spinal microglia.34 blockade of cholecystokinin-b receptor encoded by cckbr partially relieved neuropathic pain.35 p2rx3 was upregulated in rat drg neurons after peripheral nerve injury.36 downregulation of p2rx3 in drg neurons could reduce neuropathic pain behavior.37 thus the regulated genes in sni participate in mediating nerve regeneration or neuropathic pain.inﬂammatory responses induced by peripheral nerve injury peripheral nerve injury induced the expression change of cytokines and related molecules including receptors ligands suppressors and induced or regulated proteins (fig 6c; supple- mentary information table s5).]
Summary: Single-cell trajectory analysis reveals gene expression changes during neuron type-switch after nerve injury, with downregulation of pain-related genes and upregulation of inflammatory response genes.

Text 354
10.1038/s41593-020-00794-1
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 2 | early progenitors can be divided into nine progenitor subtypes. a, transition from primarily neuroepithelial to radial glia progenitor identity. immunostaining of early first trimester samples (including cs14, shown here) show strong staining for all progenitors (sox2, red), as well as tight junctions (zo-1, cyan), but limited staining for radial glia (nes, green). by cs22, nes staining increases substantially, zo-1 decreases and sox2 expression is maintained. scale bars, 50μm. b, scrna-seq identifies nine progenitor subpopulations. left: a umap plot depicts subclustered progenitor cells; middle: the velocity trajectory across progenitor subtypes. right: feature plots show high expression of vim and sox2 marking all progenitor populations. c, ntrk3 marks progenitor populations before becoming a neuronally enriched marker. progenitor cluster 3 is specifically and uniquely labeled by ntrk3, as shown in the violin plot. immunostaining for ntrk3 (cyan) shows early labeling of sox2 (red) positive progenitors at cs16 (white arrows), but expression shifts to more closely coincide with newborn neurons marked by dcx (green) by cs18 (white arrows). scale bars, 50μm. d, dlk1 marks a subset of early progenitors. dlk1 (cyan) is the top marker for progenitor cluster 8 and is exclusively expressed in early first trimester, as shown in the violin plot on the left. immunostaining for dlk1 at cs16 shows colocalization with low sox2 (red) expressing cells at the boundary of the cortical edge. this staining disappears from the cortex entirely by cs18 when dcx (green) staining emerges. for all panels, each sample was immunostained once.']. Reference sentences:[however the cell type-defining gene expression programs were largely con- served across brain regions resulting in subsets of progenitors or neurons that transcriptomically appear similar across regions (supplementary fig 2b).at the earliest timepoint cs12 the differences between brain regions were minimal and did not resemble the more advanced region-specific programs that were identifiable later in the first trimester (supplementary fig 2 and 3).using nes as a marker of radial glia tjp1 (zo-1) as an indica- tor of neuroepithelial cells and sox2 as a label for all progenitor populations we saw small numbers of nestin-positive radial glia at cs14 with substantial upregulation by cs22 that simultaneously corresponded to a waning of zo-1 (fig 2a).the resulting analysis yielded nine subclusters all marked by strong vim and sox2 expression (fig 2b).we observed that at early stages (cs14 cs16) ntrk3 broadly colocalized with sox2-positive progenitor cell populations (fig 2c and supplementary fig 16) but after cs18 it shifted from progenitor to neuronal expression as would be expected.although much of the dlk1 staining was in stromal cells peripheral to the cortex as has been previously reported36 we observed a small num- ber of dlk1-positive cells that expressed low sox2-levels at early stages such as cs16 after which dlk1 expression completely dis- appeared (fig 2d and supplementary fig 17).indeed no fluorescent in situ signal for c1orf61 or immunostaining signal for id4 was identifiable in the mouse forebrain at ts14 or 16 (fig 5b and supplementary fig 20–22).]
Summary: Trajectory patterns of progenitor subtypes transitioning from neuroepithelial to radial glia identity, marked by gene expressions, ntrk3 and dlk1, shift towards neuronal markers.

Text 355
10.1038/s41593-020-00794-1
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 1 | cell types in the early human cortex. a, scrna-seq of early cortical development. umap plot of 58,145 telencephalon or cortical dissections colored by annotated cell type. feature plots of markers of broad progenitors (sox2), radial glia (nes), ipcs (ppp1r17) and neurons (bcl11b) are shown. stacked bar chart shows cell type composition at earliest (cs12–13), middle (cs14–16) and late (cs19–22) first trimester. b, spatial immunostaining of early cortical samples. immunostaining for main cell type markers across first trimester stages. because of limited sample availability, each sample was immunostained once. nuclei shown in blue (4,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (dapi); dotted line demarcates cortical span), newborn neurons marked by dcx (green), progenitors by sox2 (red), ipcs by tbr2 (yellow) and maturing neurons by ctip2 (cyan). scale bars, 50μm; in cs13, 25μm. c, rna velocity demonstrates streams of direct and indirect neurogenesis. umap colored by age shows the segregation of samples by early and late first trimester stages. rna-velocity trajectories are depicted by gray arrows in the middle umap plot with underlying color by cell types as annotated in a. line thickness of the arrows indicates the differences in gene signature between cell types, and red arrows show predicted direct and indirect neurogenesis trajectories. the velocity plots on the right show the intensity of scored velocity for a progenitor gene, vim, and a neuronal gene, mef2c. velocities highlight the distinction between progenitors and neurons in the clustering and velocity analyses.']. Reference sentences:[the diversity of brain structures is known to emerge as a result of segmentation events that gen- erate the prosencephalon mesencephalon and rhombencephalon that are then further specified into the anatomical structures (tel- encephalon diencephalon and so on) that were dissected in this study2 (supplementary fig 1a–c).to identify the chief cell populations across brain regions and to compare them to one another we sampled all available and identifiable structures includ- ing the telencephalon diencephalon midbrain hindbrain cerebel- lum ganglionic eminences thalamus hypothalamus and cortex (supplementary fig 1–3 and supplementary table 1).clustering this data revealed minimal batch effects as most clusters contained contributions from multiple individuals and clustering segregated the samples based on early and late first trimester stages (fig 1 and supplementary fig 4).we observed that although neurogenesis ramps up by the end of the second trimester even the earliest samples contained a small number of neurons (fig 1a).the remaining clusters consisted of expected early-born neuronal populations including cajal–retzius cells marked by reln (supplementary fig 10) and subplate cells marked by tle4 and nr4a2.we were also confident of cortical identity based on the anatomical presence of the optic cups (supplementary fig 12) just ventral lateral and caudal as well as the nasal ridge (supplementary fig 12) located just ventral to our regions of interest.as expected ipcs identified by tbr2 staining did not emerge until cs18 in the dorsal telencephalon26 (fig 1b and supplementary fig 13) although we and others have observed tbr2 staining at earlier timepoints (cs16) in the ventral telencephalon27.across cortical cell types the most apparent lineage stream originated in progenitor cell populations from older samples and followed a trajectory through ipcs to neu- rons (fig 1c).during the first trimester we found a progressive and incremental shift away from neuroepithelial iden- tity (supplementary fig 14).each of the nine clusters contained some cells from all first trimester age samples suggesting that the veloc- ity and maturation trajectories were not purely a function of age (supplementary fig 15b and supplementary table 8).as expected hes5 was strongly enriched in radial glia compared to other cell types and fgf10 peaked in neuroepithelial popula- tions (supplementary fig 15).we explored whether any of these progenitors expressed gene signatures that defined excitatory neu- rons across cortical areas and found that three-quarters of the pro- genitors uniquely expressed an areal identity while the rest were unspecified (supplementary fig 15).we found strong correspondence between clusters derived from wgcna analysis and our nine progenitor subtypes and also found strong enrichment for radial glia-like networks in later stage samples (supplementary fig 15 and supplementary table 9).these data strongly indi- cated a gradient of identity across the nine progenitor populations (supplementary fig 15d).to explore the timing and spatial local- ization of each of the progenitor subpopulations we performed immunostaining of the most specific gene markers for each clus- ter (supplementary fig 7–10 and supplementary fig 16–26).we observed that at early stages (cs14 cs16) ntrk3 broadly colocalized with sox2-positive progenitor cell populations (fig 2c and supplementary fig 16) but after cs18 it shifted from progenitor to neuronal expression as would be expected.although much of the dlk1 staining was in stromal cells peripheral to the cortex as has been previously reported36 we observed a small num- ber of dlk1-positive cells that expressed low sox2-levels at early stages such as cs16 after which dlk1 expression completely dis- appeared (fig 2d and supplementary fig 17).we observed prevalent lum staining in our samples at or before cs16 with alx1 at the edges of the fore- brain including several colocalized pax6-positive cells (fig 3cd and supplementary fig 18 and 19).although the onset of neurogenesis differs between human and mouse46 we used immunostaining to verify that at these mouse stages the forebrain was already express- ing foxg1 and undergoing neurogenesis as marked by the presence of dcx (supplementary fig 11 and 13).a one-sided t-test was used in supplementary fig 1e and 15c.a loess regression was used to estimate smoothed gene expression in supplementary fig 11 and fig 4.]
Summary: Trajectory patterns show a shift from progenitors to neurons across different stages in early cortical development.

Text 356
10.1016/j.celrep.2021.109046
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 3. myogenic differentiation masks and reveals age-related changes (a) pseudotime trajectory inferred across all myogenic cells (n = 1,634). (b) pseudotime trajectories inferred for young and aged cells independently are qualitatively similar. black lines represent the mean coordinate in transcriptional space across the trajectory. (c) distribution of myogenic cells along the joint pseudotime trajectory, displayed for each animal. young cells are significantly enriched at the end of the pseudotime axis (anova, p < 0.001, means ± 95% confidence intervals [cis]). (d) rna fish staining of young and aged myogenic cells confirms significant enrichment of differentiation transcription factors myog, mef2c (p < 0.01, c2 and p < 0.05, wald tests, means ± 95% cis). dotted lines denote the threshold for high-expression fraction (bars, left axis), and gray dots are cell intensities normalized by control gene ubc (right axis). (e) dynamic time warp (dtw) distances for heterochronic (aged-young) pseudotime trajectories compared to distances computed between animals of the same age (aged-x-animal, young-x-animal). heterochronic distances were not significantly different from isochronic distances (t test, p > 0.18). distances were measured across 200 bootstrap iterations to estimate variability. (f) gene expression over pseudotime for pax7 and myogenic regulatory factors. curves are spline fits and points are expression in individual cells. values are scaled expression ([0, 1]) (means ± sds). myogenic gene expression kinetics are qualitatively preserved across ages. (g) gene ontology analysis of genes with significant age:pseudotime interactions revealed that mitochondrial respiration genes have a positive interaction across differentiation, while muscle contraction genes have a negative interaction. (h) differential expression (log2aged/young) of genes that are ‘‘masked’’ (top) and ‘‘revealed’’ (bottom) by differentiation. all of the genes shown are significantly differentially expressed at one end of the pseudotime trajectory (early, late), but not the other. (i) age-related changes in selected nmf-derived gene expression programs over pseudotime. some expression programs show larger differences with differentiation (muscle development), while other expression programs are normalized (ecm/migration). see also figure s4.']. Reference sentences:[the stem cell marker pax7 and the myogenic reg- ulatory factors displayed similar behavior across pseudotime in young and aged cells (figure 3f q > 0.05 log-likelihood ratio test age:pseudotime interaction).4 cell reports 35 109046 april 27 2021 article ll open access aged trajectories were qualitatively similar in a uniform manifold approximation and projection (umap) latent space (figure 3b; method details).we found that the trajectory distances between isochronic cells from different animals are comparable to our heterochronic comparison (figure 3e; t test aged-young versus young-x-animal p > 0.18).this result suggests that the figure 3.performing gene ontology analysis we found that genes with positive age:pseudotime interactions were enriched for mito- chondrial gene sets while negative interactions were enriched for myogenic differentiation gene sets (figure 3g; table s2).we found similar results by comparing age-related changes in primitive and committed cells selected using pseudotime coor- dinates (figure 3h; method details) marker genes and experi- mental time points (method details).here we used a sliding window approach to compute an aging trajectory across pseudotime (figure 3i; method details).rna velocity reveals an energy barrier in myogenic differentiation our observation that young myogenic cells were enriched in the late portions of the pseudotime trajectory (figure 3c) suggests that young and aged cells may progress through myogenic dif- ferentiation at different rates.after the bifurcation point aged cells exhibited only slightly lower dpseudotime values than young cells but these may also create a meaningful difference in the pseudotime distribu- tion (figure 3c).we observed this result for individual genes (figures 3 and 4) as well as for gene expression programs (figure 3h).]
Patterns of gene expression changes along a differentiation trajectory in young and aged cells, with preserved myogenic gene expression kinetics across ages.

Text 357
10.1016/j.celrep.2021.109046
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 5. rna velocity inference reveals an energy barrier between self-renewing and committed myogenic fates (a) rna velocity vectors atop separate pca embeddings of young and aged cells. velocity is qualitatively similar between young and aged cells. (b) state divergence, the relative ‘‘ﬂow’’ of cells from a given region of state space, computed from rna velocity vectors in a coarse-grained pca embedding. we found 2 metastable attractor states (negative divergence, green) corresponding to ‘‘reserve cells’’ and differentiated cells. these attractors are separated by an unstable repulsor (positive divergence, purple) state that may represent a decision point for lineage commitment. (c) example trajectories from phase point simulations initiated on either side of the repulsor state shown atop the pca embedding. points initiated after the repulsor progress through the trajectory toward the tnnc1 committed state, while points initiated before the repulsor move toward the pax7 reserve cell state. (d) rna velocity analysis of young myogenic cells profiled during muscle regeneration in vivo (de micheli et al., 2020). velocity patterns are similar to those we observe in vitro, with a bifurcation between quiescent and differentiated states. (e) divergence analysis for cells in (d) reveals that an energy barrier is also apparent during myogenic differentiation in vivo. (f) normalized distribution of pseudotime changes predicted using rna velocity for young and aged cells. young cells display a broader distribution. (g) change in pseudotime predicted for cells across the pseudotime trajectory (rolling means ± sems). aged cells show a lower proportion of cells moving forward in pseudotime near the location of the repulsor state (arrow, linear model log-likelihood ratio test, p < 0.001). this region corresponds to the repulsor based on high-velocity divergence (right axis, gray line). (h) phase point simulations fit to the young cells advance more rapidly than phase point simulations fit to the aged cells when initiated after the repulsor state (p < 0.001, wilcoxon rank-sum test on sum of pseudotime values; means ± 95% cis shown). see also figures s6 and s7.']. Reference sentences:[we embedded velocity profiles and display rna velocity esti- mates as vectors on the principal component analysis (pca) pro- jection (figure 5a).comparing rna velocity estimates in the embedding space between young and aged cells we found few qualitative differ- ences (figure 5a).cells moving figure 5.we found phase points initiated after the bifurcation point (at a coordinate with greater pseudotime value) progress forward toward the differentiated at- tractor while phase points initiated before the bifurcation point move backward toward the primitive pax7 high state (figure 5c).comparing the dpseudotime distribution between ages we found that young cells had a broader distribution (levene’s test p < 0.001; figure 5f).aged cells exhibited lower dpseudotime values near the bifurcation point suggesting that it represents an energy barrier that aged cells are less able to overcome (figure 5g).we found that phase points progress more slowly through the pseudotime trajectory in the aged velocity field (figure 5h; p < 0.001 wilcoxon rank-sum test on sum of pseudotime values; method details).adopting a concept from dynamical systems (strogatz 2015) divergence maps of the rna velocity field revealed an unstable repulsor state separating two stable attractors one marked by stem cell marker pax7 and the other by myocyte marker tnnc1 (figure 5b).phase point simulations in the rna velocity field indi- cate that the repulsor represents a bifurcation point where cells decide to travel toward the pax7 attractor or the tnnc1 attractor (figure 5d).]
The trajectory patterns reveal a decision point for lineage commitment, with cells progressing towards different attractor states.

Text 358
10.1016/j.celrep.2021.109046
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 6. rna velocity reveals molecular determinants of progression through the energy barrier (a) rna velocity vectors for representative forward-moving and backward-moving cells projected on the myogenic cell pca embedding. we randomly selected 5 bootstrap vector samples for each cell for presentation. a single cell is highlighted (dark gray arrow) for further visualization. (b) for the highlighted cell in (a), all bootstrap rna velocity vectors and their indicated destinations in the pca embedding are shown. in this forwarding moving cell, all 100 bootstrap samples showed tight agreement on the direction and destination. (c) bootstrapped rna velocity vectors were used to predict dpseudotime values. we present examples of forward-, backward-, and ambiguously moving cells based on their 95% cis for dpseudotime. we plot the observed pseudotime coordinates and the predictions made using observed counts (dpst observed counts), as well as predictions for bootstrap samples (dpst bootstrap counts). note that the ambiguous cell does not consistently move forward or backward across the bootstrap samples (arrow). (d) differentially expressed genes between cells moving forward and backward in the repulsor region. the values shown are residuals after regression of the pseudotime covariate from log(cpm + 1) counts and the addition of minimum values to give a positive range. myogenic transcription factors myog and mef2c mark cells progressing forward, while primitive cell markers sdc4, vcam1 and stress markers anxa2, anxa5 mark cells moving backward. this suggests that relative levels of myogenic transcription factors, primitive cell markers, and stress signals may inﬂuence cellular decisions to move forward or backward through the differentiation program. (e) gene ontology enrichment analysis indicates that myogenic genes are downregulated in backward-moving muscs relative to forward-progressing muscs (means ± 95% cis). (f) schematic overview of conceptual models for the difference in differentiation outcomes between young and aged myogenic cells. here, we found support for a difference in the rate of myogenic differentiation based on transcriptional distributions and dynamics (differentiation rates). we do not find evidence of a difference in cell fate with age or for differences in differentiation trajectories between young and aged cells. see also figure s8.']. Reference sentences:[we then propagated these cis to the dpseudotime estimates (figure 6c).by contrast cells moving backward had a greater expression of primitive cell markers vcam1 and sdc4 (seale et al. 2004; cornelison et al. 2001) and cell stress markers anxa2 and anxa5 (figure 6e).we also identified the transcription factors scx sox4 and snai2 as markers of back- ward-moving cells (figure 6e).rna ve- locity inference (la manno et al. 2018) allowed us to move figure 6.our results support a conceptual model in which myogenic differentiation outcomes change with age due to changes in the differentiation rate rather than due to changes in cell fate or commitment trajectories (figure 6f).]
Differentiation trajectories are influenced by myogenic and primitive cell markers, stress signals, and transcription factors.

Text 359
10.1126/sciadv.abf7452
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 3. switch neuron provisional gene regulatory network. (a) single-cell transcriptome trajectory of the switch neuron during development (n=1467 cells). the cells are ordered on the basis of pseudo-time, and the color code indicates their stage. ig, initial gastrula; mg, mid gastrula; en, early neurula; ln, late neurula; iti, initial tailbud i; etii, early tailbud ii; mtii, mid tailbud ii; lti, late tailbud i; ltii, late tailbud ii. (b) pseudo-temporal gene expression cascade of switch neurons. expression of representative transcription factors and signaling components in reconstructed developmental trajectories. (c) provisional gene regulatory network of switch neurons based on the regulatory cascade (materials and methods).']. Reference sentences:[namely transcriptome trajectories and temporal cascades of genes encoding transcription factors were identified in the cell lineages forming switch neurons (fig 3 a and b).the resulting interconnections can be represented as a provisional gene network (fig 3c).together comparative transcriptome analyses sug- gest that the coronet-associated neural circuit contains multiple cell a c −5.0 −2.5 0.0 2.5 5.0 −10 0 10 20 component 1 component 2 stage ig mg en ln iti etii mtii lti ltii larva adra2 l147.32 c2.478 orphan bhlh-1 ror lhx1 emc2 otx hnf6 hmg1/2 neurod meis lhx2/9 emc dll-b orphan fox-1 ets/pointed2 aristaless zeb1/2 hes-b bsh foxh-a b myt1 emc2 foxh-a emc orphan bhlh-1 lhx1 neurod bsh lhx2/9 hes-b hmg1/2 ybx1/2/3 aristaless meis hnf6 zeb1/2 ror ets/pointed2 orphan fox-1 smad1/5 dll-b otx −3 −2 210−1 3 expression levels fig 3.highly variable regulatory genes and signaling pathway genes with q < 1 × 10−180 are shown in the pseudotemporal expression pattern in fig 3b and cluster-buster (60) was used to investigate the putative direct interaction by searching clusters of prespecified motifs 2 kb upstream of the transcription start site of each gene.the regulatory network in fig 3c was plotted with biotapestry.]
Summary: Single-cell trajectory and gene expression cascade of switch neurons during development, leading to a provisional gene regulatory network.

Text 360
10.1038/s41586-021-03569-1
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 3 | impaired lung regeneration and sources of inflammation. a, b, umap of investigated alveolar and airway epithelial cells (a) and corresponding group assignments (b). c, differential gene expression (log-normalized, scaled; see methods) of at1 and at2 cells from covid-19 and control lungs. columns, single cells; rows, expression of top-regulated genes. left bar, lineage markers for at1 (purple) and at2 (pink) cells. colour-coded top lanes indicate expression strength of signatures (log-normalized; see methods) and group assignment as indicated on the right. exp., expression. d, e, violin plots of etv5 and cav1 mrna expression (log-normalized) in at2 and at1 cells, respectively; wilcoxon rank-sum test with bonferroni correction. f, umap embedding of at1 and at2 cells and identified datps; inset indicates group assignments. g, violin plots of datp signature expression (log-normalized) in at1 and at2 cells. wilcoxon rank-sum test. h, first three dcs showing main trajectories of']. Reference sentences:[there was a reduction in the epithelial cell compartment due to loss of both alveo- lar type ii (at2) and type i (at1) cells and an increase in monocytes/ macrophages fibroblasts and neuronal cells; these observations were independent of donor sex (extended data fig 3a b).we found no major differences in the expression of ace2 cd147 (also known as bsg) npr1 tmprss2 furin or ctsl between covid-19 and control lungs (extended data fig 3c–f).impaired alveolar epithelial regeneration within the epithelial compartment we identified alveolar epithelial cells (at1 and at2 cells; n = 20949) airway epithelial cells (basal cili- ated club goblet and mucous cells; n = 7223) a cluster characterized by the expression of inflammatory and cell cycle genes including irf8 b2m mki67 and top2a (‘cycling epithelium’; n = 609) and a cluster showing high expression of the extracellular matrix (ecm) components col6a3 col1a2 and col3a1 (‘ecmhigh epithelium’; n = 1179) (fig 3a b extended data fig 8a–c supplementary tables 2 7).at2 and t1 cells in control lungs formed distinct clusters (fig 3a b) and demonstrated the expected changes in differential gene expression (dge) analysis including expression of the lineage markers sftpc and sftpb in at2 cells and clic5 and ager in at1 cells (fig 3c sup- plementary table 7).by contrast clustering of at2 and at1 cells in covid-19 lungs was less discrete with a substantial portion of cells not overlapping with their control counterparts (fig 3b).both at2 and at1 cells from covid-19 lungs showed decreased overall expression of defining markers (fig 3c).covid-19 at2 cells displayed decreased expression of etv5 (fig 3d) a transcription factor that is required for maintaining at2 cell identity.cav1 a marker of late at1 maturation24 was expressed at significantly lower levels in at1 cells from covid-19 lungs (fig 3e).we used expression of the datp marker genes (krt8 cldn4 and cdkn1a)25 to develop a datp sig- nature (see methods; extended data fig 8e–h supplementary table 8) and found that alveolar epithelial cells from covid-19 lungs scored significantly higher for expression of this signature than those from control lungs (fig 3f g extended data fig 8i).dc analysis separated a main trajectory from at2 to at1 cells while datps were primarily local- ized between at2 and at1 cells (fig 3h extended data fig 8j–n).datps were more frequent in covid-19 than control lungs (fig 3i).immunofluorescence staining of corresponding tissues showed that the frequency of krt8+ and cldn4+ datps was higher in covid-19 lungs (fig 3j extended data fig 8r s) and we observed progressive loss of at1 cell abundance with increasing time from symptom onset to death (extended data fig 8t).il-1β was more strongly expressed in monocytes and macrophages from individuals with covid-19 than from healthy individuals or patients in the other disease groups (fig 3k extended data fig 9a–c).il-6 another key inflammatory cytokine invoked in the pathophysiology of covid-19 was more abundant in epithelial cells from patients with covid-19 but was not differentially expressed in macrophages from these patients compared to patients in other disease groups (fig 3l extended data fig 9d–f).article extended data fig 3 | effect of sex on cellular composition and host receptor expression.g as in e but demonstrating isotype usage in patients with covid-19 (corresponding to fig 3e f; shown are the top 20 commbinations; complete list in supplementary table 6).]
Summary: Trajectory analysis revealed a shift from at2 to at1 cells and increased datps in covid-19 lungs, indicating impaired regeneration and inflammation.

Text 361
10.1016/j.cell.2021.04.003
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure s2. neuronal and glial cell types across ages and ventricles, related to figure 2 (a) glial and neuronal cell markers. t-sne of neuronal and glia-like cell profiles from scrna-seq in embryonic chp (dots, as in figure 2a), colored by expression (log2(tp10k+1)) of tubb3 (neuronal marker, top) and slc1a3 (glial marker, bottom). (b) neuronal/glia-like subset markers and neuropeptides. median expression level in expressing cells (color) and proportion of expressing cells (circle size) of selected genes (columns) in neuronal and glia-like subsets (rows). (c) organization of the developing 3v chp. in situ hybridization images (allen brain atlas and genepaint) of marker genes for epithelial cells (ttr), progenitor cells (rspo3) and developing pineal gland clusters (krt19, crx), localizing the progenitors adjacent to the pineal gland and choroid plexus epithelial cells. rightmost panel: schematic of the 3v structure. (d) neuro-glial subclusters. umap of neuronal and glia-like nucleus profiles across age groups from snrna-seq from the three ventricles, colored by age (left) and cluster membership (right). (e) neuro-glial marker gene expression across snrna-seq clusters. median expression level in expressing cells (color) and proportion of expressing cells (circle size) of selected genes (columns) across clusters (rows). (f) rna velocity analysis of inferred differentiation trajectory of neuronal and epithelial cells from a predicted common progenitor pool. diffusion map embedding of cells (dots) from embryonic 3v']. Reference sentences:[]
Summary: Trajectory patterns of neuronal and glial cell differentiation from a common progenitor pool in developing single cells.

Text 362
10.1038/s41592-021-01129-z
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 5 | single-cell reconstructions of dynamic trajectories of chromatin bivalency and transcription from naive to primed mescs. a, the framework for pseudosingle-cell reconstructions of bivalent chromatin modifications. the pseudotemporal trajectory of chromatin bivalency (h3k4me3 and h3k27me3) and gene expression in pseudosingle cells was established by using single-cell transcriptome as the anchor. b, heat map showing bivalency score of genes in three groups. representative genes are listed alongside the heat map. c, heat map showing expression level of genes as identified in b across single cells. d, line plots showing dynamic patterns of chromatin bivalency in genes from three groups. red line indicates average score in each group. e, go term functional enrichment (biological processes) of three gene clusters as in b. f, examples for the dynamic changes of h3k4me3, h3k27me3, rna and bivalency score at representative genes along pseudotime.']. Reference sentences:[using this framework we analyzed bivalency dynamics in mescs (fig 5a and extended data fig 5a–d; methods).this finding was verified as genes with high bivalency scores largely over- lapped with the previously established bivalent gene list32 (extended data fig 5ab).single cells were ordered along pseudotime and 603 genes with the most variable bivalency scores were clustered into three groups: decreased (cluster 1) tran- siently noticeable (cluster 2) and increased (cluster 3) (fig 5b–d).however the expression of most genes was not yet evident at this time point (fig 5c).this finding was also supported by specific inspection of the dynamics of bivalency score h3k4me3 h3k27me3 and rna around representative genes including two pluripotency genes along pseudotime (fig 5f and extended data fig 5ef).as a caveat technical dropouts in dual omics cannot be fully excluded as a confounding factor for relatively low correlations between h3k4me3 and rna in a subset of genes (fig 4d) as well as during inferring bivalent domains (fig 5bc).]
Summary: Dynamic trajectories of chromatin bivalency and gene expression in single cells during differentiation from naive to primed state.

Text 363
10.1038/s41467-021-22973-9
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 5 validation of the neutrotime model. a spatial autocorrelation (moran’s i) of genes calculated from a separately obtained dimensionality reduction using monocle 3 plotted versus genes correlated with neutrotime. b calculation of a simplified version of neutrotime directly from gene expression space yields high convergence with neutrotime. r indicates the spearman’s rank correlation coefficient. c integration of bulk rna-seq data from developing and mature neutrophils from evrard et al. (geo:gse109467) onto neutrotime-s. one-way anova (p < 0.0001) followed by tukey’s multiple comparisons test. d heatmap detailing differentially expressed genes between mature bone marrow neutrophils and blood neutrophils with benjamin & hochberg adjusted p-value (corresponding to fdr) ≤ 0.05 and log2 fold change ≥ 1. several core neutrotime transcripts are highlighted. e–g scrna-seq data were obtained from the human cell atlas, and cells belonging to the neutrophil lineage (n = 7049) were clustered together. expression of an early (e) and late (f) neutrotime signature in neutrophils. g combined representation of early and late neutrotime scores in the human cell atlas confirms the trajectory.']. Reference sentences:[aside from the small cluster identifiable as preneus monocle revealed a continuous distribution of neu- trophils across bone marrow blood and spleen (supplementary fig 5a).broad correspondence between monocle’s pseudotime analysis and the clusters identified by umap was evident but monocle analysis did not integrate preneus into the continuum inducing us to adopt a diffusion map approach for subsequent analysis steps (supplementary fig 5a).we applied hartigan’s dip test to a cell-to- cell distance matrix as well as to a cell ordering obtained from the diffusion map confirming a multimodal distribution (supple- mentary fig 5d).mapping neutrotime onto the principal curve and vice versa showed high convergence and a spearman correlation of 0.955 (supplementary fig 5c).the first 3 groups were largely found in bone marrow (supplementary fig 5b) suggesting specific accumulation points in early neutrophil development.monocle disclosed no evidence for distinct trajectories of differentiation at the resolution provided by our dataset (supplementary fig 5a).g distribution of neutrotime (derived from diffusion map) maturation score (derived from principal component analysis see supplementary fig 5a–c) and preneu score in cells ordered along neutrotime.we then selected genes that displayed high spearman correlation with neutrotime a high rank in moran’s i and the highest expression abundance retaining only the 100 most informative genes (fig 5a).we tested neutrotime-s against the full neu- trotime and found a spearman correlation coefficient of 0.905 (fig 5b).preneus had the lowest neu- trotime-s followed by immature bone marrow neutrophils mature bone marrow neutrophils and finally blood neutrophils supporting the neutrotime paradigm (fig 5c).preneus and immature marrow neutrophils localized closely together by neu- trotime-s as did mature marrow neutrophils and mature blood neutrophils; however a large gap separated immature and mature populations highlighting the marked shift in gene expression that characterizes this transition (fig 5c).differential expression analysis identified 981 differen- tially expressed genes that characterized this transition high- lighting that blood neutrophils are distinct from even the most mature marrow neutrophils (fig 5d).a score for early and late neutrotime was then calculated for each cell and plotted on a umap embedding of enriched neutrophils (fig 5d–f).for visualization in fig 5a only genes with mean expression ≥ 0.1 (same threshold as above) were shown.gene ontology enrichment analysis was performed and visualized using the r package topgo v2.38.177 (supplementary fig 5).the results were then plotted against the genes’ correlations with neutrotime with size representing mean expression level (fig 5a).figure 5a: descriptive analysis.figure 5b: r indicates the spearman’s rank correlation coefficient.figure 5c: one- way anova (p < 0.0001) followed by tukey’s multiple comparison test (two- tailed).figure 5d: differential expression analysis.figure 5e–g: descriptive analysis.]
Patterns related to the trajectory of neutrophil development were analyzed using single-cell transcriptomics, revealing distinct clusters and transitions in gene expression across different cell types.

Text 364
10.1038/s41467-021-22973-9
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 8 transcriptional regulation of acute and subacute inﬂammation. a overview of differentially expressed transcription factors in healthy blood and inﬂamed compartments. as in fig 1c, marker genes for each condition were identified by wilcoxon rank sum test (two-tailed) using the seurat function “findallmarkers” with standard settings; only genes with loge fold change between conditions ≥ 0.25 and bonferroni adjusted p value ≤ 0.05 were considered. the list of marker genes was subsetted to transcription factors to display differentially expressed transcription factors between conditions. cells were randomly downsampled to 200 cells per condition for plotting only. b, c inferred regulatory activity of tfs in il-1β-induced and k/bxn-induced inﬂammation. as chea3 contains libraries from multiple species, only the corresponding human protein symbols are shown. d inferred activity versus actual expression of tfs in il-1β polarization and along the k/bxn trajectory in the diffusion map.']. Reference sentences:[visualization of the core neutrotime transcripts disclosed a remarkable similarity among expression profiles of key neutrotime genes irrespective of tissue (supplementary fig 8).we observed marked changes in transcription factor expression across inﬂammatory conditions (fig 8a).examining transcription factor regulatory activity as inferred through chea3 again suggested differential participation of tfs in orchestrating homeostatic and inﬂamed gene expression programs (fig 8b–c).plotting transcription factor activity by chea3 against transcript expression we iden- tified tfs associated with acute inﬂammation in response to il- 1β as well as k/bxn immune-complex arthritis most promi- nently cebpb expression and function in both inﬂamed condi- tions (fig 8d).in addition we extracted cell trajectories from the il-1β- and the k/bxn serum-induced inﬂammation models ordered the cells along the trajectories and extracted the top 100 genes with the highest (most advanced along the trajectory) and lowest (least advanced in the trajectory) correlation to analyze the transcription factor activity in a similar way (fig 8b–d).figure 8a: as in fig 1c marker genes for each condition were identified by wilcoxon rank sum test (two-tailed) using the seurat function “findallmarkers” with standard settings; only genes with log fold change between conditions ≥ 0.25 and bonferroni adjusted p-value ≤ 0.05 were considered.]
Summary: Trajectory analysis reveals differential transcription factor activity in inflammatory conditions, with CEBPB prominently involved in acute inflammation.

Text 365
10.1016/j.cell.2021.04.028
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure s4. integrating hio and developing duodenum data unveils transient cell states during human intestine mesenchyme development, related to figures 4 and 5 a) umap embedding of mesenchymal cells from developing human early small intestine and duodenum, with cells colored by type (top left) or age (bottom left). cell type annotations are shown top right. b) feature plots show the aggregated expression of ligands of each signaling pathway in developing duodenum mesenchyme. c) time point distribution of mesenchymal cells on the umap embedding, with cells colored by type. d) stacked bar plot shows the proportion of mesenchymal subtypes at different time points in the developing duodenum, with color scheme consistent with panel a. e) integrated umap embedding of developing duodenum and 4-week thio intestinal mesenchymal cells. left, developing duodenum cells in the integrated embedding colored by subtype. right, thio cells colored by the most similar developing duodenum subtype; gray cells represent developing duodenum. f) in vitro hio time course bi-potent cluster (c9 of hio time course in figure 5e) and clusters in the mesenchymal trajectory (c5, c3, c10, c1 and c8) were extracted (top left, clusters from original spring embedding are highlighted) and projected to a new umap embedding to visualize mesenchymal cell developmental trajectories. cells were sub-clustered and annotated or colored by age (top right). de: definitive endoderm. g) relative transcriptome similarity between differentiated intestinal mesenchymal clusters of hios (m1-m5) and mesenchymal subtypes observed in 7 pcw developing duodenum. h) schematic suggests developmental relationships between duodenum mesenchymal subtypes based on transcriptome similarity and coordinated changes in intestinal epithelial stem cell states. dashed arrows indicate lower probability. i) top, schematic shows selected hio mesenchymal cells as precursors to subepithelial mesenchyme, villus core, gdf10+ mesenchyme and smooth muscle cells. dashed lines represent separation of in vitro hio and developing duodenum time points. bottom, dots represent the interaction intensity between intestinal stem cells and specified mesenchymal subtypes, or signaling pathway component expression of specific cell types at each time point. lines represent interpolated spline curves. interaction intensity is quantified as the averaged expression of a ligand-receptor gene pair in intestinal epithelial stem cells and each of the specified mesenchymal subtypes. pathway signaling component expression is calculated as the sum of normalized expression levels of related genes in each cell type.']. Reference sentences:[]
Summary: Developmental trajectories of mesenchymal cells in human intestine, including transient cell states and relationships between different subtypes based on transcriptome similarity.

Text 366
10.1038/s41590-021-00931-3
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 4 | activation recapitulates stromal inflammation. a, transcription of inflammatory genes as determined by qpcr after stimulation of in vitro– expanded myeloma mscs with recombinant human (rh) tnf or rhil-1β. fold change is proportionate to transcription under unstimulated conditions. results are from four stromal cultures derived from individuals with mm. b, transcription of inflammatory genes as determined by qpcr after stimulation of in vitro–expanded non-myeloma control mscs with rhtnf or rhil-1β. fold change is proportionate to transcription under unstimulated conditions. results are from five stromal cultures derived from non-cancer control individuals. c, heat map of the top 50 differentially expressed genes that were upregulated in msc1 as compared to msc2 (left) or upregulated in msc2 as compared to msc1 (right). d, monocle 3 pseudotime analysis of mscs in individuals with myeloma. ‘s’ represents an arbitrarily selected starting point of trajectory calculations. the data in a and b are presented as mean±s.e.m. significance was calculated using the mann–whitney u test (two-tailed); ns, p>0.05; p≤0.05; p≤0.01.']. Reference sentences:[cd44 transcription was enriched in the imsc clusters and was also enriched at the protein level as determined by flow cytometry on cd271+ mscs in newly diagnosed individuals with mm versus in non-cancer control individuals (fig 2a and extended data fig 4a).this response was not restricted to cells from mm bone marrow as mscs from non-cancer control individuals also acquired an imsc-like transcriptome upon stimulation with tnf or il-1β (fig 4b) (see supplementary tables 1 and 8 for clinical characteristics of msc donors).the differentially expressed inflam- matory genes that drove clustering of imscs were consistently transcribed at higher levels in msc1 compared to msc2 (fig 4c) suggesting that cluster msc2 may represent an intermediate state of activation.in agreement pseudotime analysis predicted that with a pseudo starting point at cluster msc5 the trajectory of transcrip- tional changes from non-inflammatory mscs to msc1 can only progress via cluster msc2 (fig 4d and extended data fig 3d).to iden- tify immune cell subclusters in mm bone marrow with the ability to activate mscs we analyzed the transcription of tnf and il1b the cytokines capable of inducing an imsc-like transcriptome in vitro (fig 4ab).see extended data fig 4b for sorting strategy.see extended data fig 4a for gating strategy.the gating strategies are depicted in extended data fig 4b.see extended data fig 4c for gating strategy.]
Summary: Trajectory analysis reveals a progression from non-inflammatory to activated states in single cells, influenced by inflammatory gene expression changes.

Text 367
10.1038/s41467-021-23111-1
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 2 single-cell sequencing identifies an ageing profile in 5xfad xo4− microglia. a pca of 893 single cells (6 m wt = 243 cells, 24 m wt = 121 cells, 6 m 5xfad xo4− = 95 cells, 6 m 5xfad xo4+ = 434 cells; m, month) and 1671 feature genes showing the distribution of cells from each facs-sorted sample. pc, principal component. b pca plot of single microglia coloured by single cell consensus (sc3) clusters and composition of automated clusters as a percentage of sequenced facs-sorted cell populations. c pca plots for single microglia coloured by expression of selected ageing microglia genes (i-ii), homeostatic (iii) and signature genes associated with xo4+ microglia (iv-v). min = 0 for all genes, defa17 max = 4.77, defa24 max = 7.41, crybb1 max = 4.13, cst7 max = 5.47, ccl3 max = 4.89. d, e diffusion maps pseudotime analysis of microglial populations ordered by their expression of (d) ageing degs (24 m wt vs 6 m wt, 42 degs) or (e) phagocytic degs (6 m 5xfad xo4+ vs 6 m 5xfad xo4−, 474 degs). f scatter plot showing the relationship between ageing and phagocytosing pseudotime in individual cells, and the density of cells at each point during the ageing (bottom) and phagocytosing (left) trajectories. g hierarchical clustering and heatmap showing expression of the top 50 degs across the 4 sc3 clusters.']. Reference sentences:[the factor explaining the greatest variance in gene expression was plaque phagocytosis (i.e. xo4+/xo4− supplementary fig 2a).to investigate whether plaque phagocytosis is affected by age we created gene cytometry plots which show the distribution of differentially expressed genes (degs) by their significance score (i.e. false discovery rate (fdr)-weighted log fold change (lfc)) for both age and xo4+/xo4− factors (supplementary fig 2b).we identified gene sets that are associated with either age plaque internalization or both (fig 1f g and volcano plots in supplementary fig 2c–e).most degs (black points and contour plot) were associated with xo4+ microglia (fig 1f q1 and q2) which was amplified by ageing as 39% (902/2302 genes) of xo4+-associated genes were also associated with age at 4 m (m month; fig 1f q2) rising to 56% (1320/2364 genes) by 6 m (fig 1g q2; and supplementary fig 2f).we examined whether microglial subpopulations in 5xfad mice adopted an aging phenotype by including 893 facs-sorted microglia from wt adult (6 m) and wt old mice (24 m) as well as both xo4− and xo4+ populations from a 6 m old 5xfad mouse (fig 2a).pc3 separated 6 m from aged wt cells while 5xfad xo4− cells were also shifted in the direction of aged wt microglia (fig 2a).single-cell consensus clustering (sc3)40 separated microglia into four clusters whereby 99.8% of 5xfad xo4+ cells and 99.2% of wt 6 m microglia were entirely contained within clusters 2 and 3 respectively (fig 2b).the ageing signature was enriched in α-defensin genes (fig 2ci-ii) antimicrobial peptides which mobilize immune cells and enhance phagocytosis in the periphery41 although their role in the brain has not been described previously.consistent with our bulk rna-seq data (fig 1e h) we observed loss of homeostatic genes (e.g. crybb1 fig 2ciii) and upregulated genes associated with xo4+ microglia (e.g. cst7 ccl3 fig 2civ-v) in xo4+ microglia.to further elucidate the molecular microglial trajectories in 5xfad mice we used the diffusion maps algorithm destiny42 to order cells in aging pseudotime defined by the expression of the 42 ageing-specific degs (fdr < 0.05 top 20 degs for ageing are shown in supplementary fig 7a full list in supplementary data 5) between 6 m and 24 m wt microglia (fig 2d).conversely cells ordered by their phagocytic pseudotime using 474 phagocytosis-specific degs (fdr < 0.05 top 20 degs for phagocytosis are shown in supplementary fig 7b full list in supplementary data 5) between xo4+ and xo4− ad microglia switched from a non-phagocytic to a phagocytic gene expression signature with few cells exhibiting intermediate signatures (fig 2e).although the molecular signatures associated with xo4+ and xo4− microglia are distinct the pseudoage of individual microglia lies on a continuum within each 5xfad population that is controlled by an independent component of aging unrelated to phagocytosis (fig 2f) and may reﬂect differences in cellular age.the top 50 most variable genes included microglial identity genes (crybb1 alox5ap maf) hif1a and its target genes (hif1a igf1 spp1 pkm gapdh) α-defensin genes (defa20 defa21 defa24 gm15284) chemokines (ccl3 ccl4 ccl6) and lysosomal genes (lyz2 cst7 ctsa) and clustered samples according to both age and phagocytic phenotype (fig 2g).interestingly in the present study no 24 m wt microglia clustered together with the xo4+ microglia (fig 2b) highlighting the specificity of the gene expression signature associated with xo4+ microglia to phagocytosis.the covariate analysis (supplementary fig 2a) revealed that only 8 genes contribute to gender- related variation (fdr < 0.01).the top 50 degs across the 4 groups in fig 2g were plotted using sc3’s get_de_genes() which uses a non-parametric kruskal-wallis test.]
Summary: Trajectory analysis reveals distinct aging and phagocytosis patterns in microglia populations, with a continuum of aging independent of phagocytosis.

Text 368
10.1038/s41419-021-03832-3
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 4 single-cell rna-sequencing analysis of the cell population in healthy controls. a gene expression plots of cenpw, pttg1 and birc5. dot colour corresponds to the level of gene expression in each cell. t-sne, t-distributed stochastic neighbour embedding. b representative immunohistochemistry staining of cenpw and pttg1 in healthy cartilage tissues. scale bar, left, 500 μm; right, 50 μm, and quantification of positive cells of different areas (up, middle, deep) in healthy cartilage tissues displayed by box plot (n = 5). p < 0.05. c, d monocle pseudotime trajectory showing the progression of kbd, oa and the control. e the expression of the genes in a branch-dependent manner. each row indicates the standardised kinetic curves of a gene. the centre of the heatmap shows the kinetic curve value at the root of the trajectory. from the centre to the left of the heatmap, the kinetic curve progresses from the root along the trajectory to fate 1. starting from the right, the curve from the root to fate 2.']. Reference sentences:[distinct cpcs which were markedly expanded in nor- mal tissue (fig 2d) were identified by their expression of the known markers stmn1 pttg1 cdkn3 birc5 ube2s and cenpw (fig 4a).we investigated the expression of cenpw and pttg1 in cartilage tissues by using immunohistochemistry assays and validated the existence of cpcs in normal cartilage (fig 4b).cell death and disease (2021) 12:551 page 5 of 15 official journal of the cell death differentiation association investigated in cartilage tissues from oa and kbd patients and the results showed that pptg1 and birc5 were upregulated in the superficial zone of oa cartilage while they were upregulated in the deep zone of kbd cartilage (supplementary fig 4).we found that the pseudospace trajectory axis derived from monocle yielded three different trajectory states (fig 4c).chondrocytes from normal cartilage were present at the start of the pseudospace trajectory which then branched into 2 distinct fates populated mainly with either kbd (fate 1) or oa (mostly fate 2) (fig 4d).igf1 vcan pcsk5 and spp1 were upregulated only in cells at fate 2 (fig 4e).]
Summary: Trajectory analysis reveals distinct cell fate branches based on gene expression patterns in single-cell populations.

Text 369
10.1038/s41419-021-03832-3
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 1 single-cell rna-sequencing analysis of human healthy control chondrocyte tissue samples. a seven healthy human chondrocyte clusters. visualisation of clustering by t-sne plot of healthy control samples, identified by cell type. b monocle pseudotime trajectory showing the progression of seven clusters of healthy chondrocytes. c heat map of scaled gene expression data for the top 10 differentially expressed genes identifying each cluster, with selected genes listed. d gene expression plots demonstrating high expression of sh3bgrl3 in sh3bgrl3hi fibrocartilage chondrocytes1, igfbp5 in igfbp5hi fibrocartilage chondrocytes-2, cdc20 in cdc20hi cartilage progenitor cells-1, kiaa0101 in kiaa0101hi cartilage progenitor cells-2, eif5a in eif5ahi regulatory chondrocytes, sox9 in sox9hi prehypertrophic chondrocytes and txnip in txniphi homeostatic chondrocytes. dot colour corresponds to the level of gene expression in each cell. t-sne, t-distributed stochastic neighbour embedding. e representative immunohistochemistry staining of sh3bgrl3, igfbp5, birc5, sox9, eif5a and cdc20 in healthy cartilage tissues. scale bar, left, 500 μm; right, 50 μm, and quantification of positive cells of different areas (superficial, middle, deep) in cartilage tissues displayed by box plot (n = 5). p < 0.05.']. Reference sentences:[unbiased clustering of the chondrocytes resulted in seven clusters originating from healthy human cartilage tissues (fig 1a).specifically the following cells were identified: fibrocartilage chondrocytes-1 (fcs-1 expressing sh3bgrl3 s100a6 and myl9) fibrocartilage chondrocytes-2 (fcs-2 expressing igfbp5 and lmcd1) cartilage progenitor cells-1 (cpcs-1 expressing cdc20 ube2c cenpf and ckap2) regulatory chondrocytes (regcs expressing eif5a pgk1 anxa1 and tuba1a) prehypertrophic chondrocytes (prehtcs expressing sox9 col9a3 and col11a1) homeostatic chondrocytes (homcs expres- sing txnip ifitm3 gdf15 and timp1) and cartilage progenitor cells 2 (cpcs-2 expressing kiaa0101 birc5 cdkn3 and tmmn1) (fig 1c d).single-cell trajectory of normal chondrocyte differentiation to study the differentiation of healthy human chon- drocytes into different clusters and the corresponding gene expression we used monocle to reconstruct the pseudotime trajectory (fig 1b).the two termini of the tree were populated by fc-1 and regcs for fate 1 and fc-2 prehtcs and homcs for fate 2 (fig 1b).cell death and disease (2021) 12:551 page 3 of 15 official journal of the cell death differentiation association markedly increased in cells that differentiated via fate 1 (supplementary fig 1).to study the distribution of different cell clusters we used immunohistochemistry to detect marker gene expression (fig 1e).]
Summary: Trajectory of healthy chondrocyte differentiation into seven clusters, identified by gene expression patterns.

Text 370
10.1038/s41587-021-00927-2
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 3 | dissection of native human hematopoiesis with multimodal cell state inference and mtdna-based lineage tracing. a, schematic of experimental design. whole human bone marrow mononuclear cells (bmmcs) were stained with hashtag antibodies and a 242-antibody panel for asap-seq processing. b, reduced dimension representation and cell clustering of high-quality cells (n=10,928) inferred using chromatin accessibility. c, rank sorting of informative protein tags in distinguishing cell cluster identification. negative controls (rat epitopes) are shown in red. d, characterization of cell populations for six selected markers. e, characterization of 99 somatic mtdna mutations identified in the bmmcs. selected mutations enriched for lineage bias (13,069g>a and 13,711g>a; x axis; extended data fig 3e) and highest for allele frequency (af) (16,260c>t; y axis) are highlighted. f, projection of highlighted mutations from e on the reduced dimension space. thresholds for + were 50% for 16,260c>t and 5% for 13,069g>a based on empirical density. g, developmental trajectory of monocyte differentiation using semi-supervised pseudotime analysis. h, expression of cell surface markers along the developmental trajectory highlighted in g. rows are min–max normalized. i, comparison of maximum gene activity scores (x axis) and protein (y axis) during pseudotime. each dot is a gene/surface protein pair. pdc, plasmacytoid dendritic cell.']. Reference sentences:[we permeabilized cells under lll conditions to retain mtdna fragments and retained 10928 high-quality cells (fig 3a and methods).dimensionality reduc- tion and clustering of chromatin accessibility partitioned the cells into 21 distinct clusters spanning the major hematopoietic lineages (fig 3b and supplementary table 2).notably we did not remove predicted cell doublets as these were enriched for monocytic progenitors a real cell state/type present at the expected frequencies (extended data fig 3ab and methods).the model rediscovered many classical hematopoietic lineage markers including cd3 cd4 and cd8 in lymphoid cells; cd371 (clec12a) and cd2 in myeloid cells; cd71 (tfrc) in erythroid cells; and cd38 in more mature progenitor cells (fig 3cd and extended data fig 3c).similarly tf activities correlated with surface marker abundance as expected including gata1 in erythroid cells and cebpa in myeloid pro- genitors and monocytes (extended data fig 3d).selected mutations enriched for lineage bias (13069 g>a and 13711 g>a; x axis; extended data fig 3e) and highest for allele frequency (af) (16260 c>t; y axis) are highlighted.using mgatk14 we detected 99 heteroplasmic mtdna mutations that were enriched for expected nucleotide sub- stitutions14 (extended data fig 3f).we used cell subset annotations to examine for putative lineage bias and detected lineage-restricted somatic mutations such as 13069 g>a and 13711 g>a that were relatively depleted in cells from the erythroid lineage but showed no predicted loss or gain of function (fig 3ef and extended data fig 3gh).furthermore one highly heteroplasmic variant 16260 c>t was present at ~40% heteroplasmy in the population yet was evenly distributed across the different lineages (fig 3ef).although markers associated with multipotent and other lineage progenitor cells such as cd34 and cd49d (itga4) were downregulated early in the trajectory monocyte markers such as cd64 (fcgr1a) and cd31 (pecam1) were quickly upregulated and persisted throughout differentiation (fig 3h and supplementary table 3).we also observed similar patterns of dynamic surface marker expression throughout erythroid differentiation (extended data fig 3k).interestingly among the proteins that were gained after commitment from the progenitor cluster the increase in protein expression during monocyte differentiation was generally pre- ceded by a gain of accessible chromatin at associated loci which we corroborated in erythroid differentiation (fig 3i extended data fig 3k–m and methods).application of mgatk14 revealed 106 heteroplas- mic mutations (fig 5l) including an enrichment of specific nucleo- tide substitutions (extended data fig 5m) as observed in our bone marrow experiment (fig 3).in particular we observe chromatin-based priming dur- ing a monocyte developmental trajectory in bone marrow (fig 3).finally we further restricted the set of genes for the comparison of max protein tag and max gene activity score (fig 3i) to genes where the protein peaked after 0.25 in the pseudotime directory to eliminate factors associated with multipotent or erythroid-biased progenitors.l. expression of chromatin activity scores along the monocytic developmental trajectory for genes encoding proteins shown in fig 3h.selected protein markers (a) and corresponding gene activity scores (b) superimposed on the atac-clustered pbmcs from the intracellular staining experiment (see fig 3a).]
Summary: Identification of monocytic developmental trajectory and associated gene and protein expression patterns in single-cell hematopoiesis.

Text 371
10.1038/s43018-021-00215-7
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 3 | accelerated evolution of estrogen independence during combination therapy. a, changes in single-cell estrogen receptor activity and signatures of estrogen dependent (luminal) and estrogen-independent (basal) phenotypes during treatment (columns), in tumors resistant (persistent are shown in red) or sensitive (shrinkingshown inblue) to therapy. pathway trends across tumors were determined using hierarchical regression (solid lines). tumor pathway trajectories are shown by dashed lines and confidence intervals of model estimates are shown by shaded regions. pathway activity measured using the ssgsea signatures (hallmark estrogen response early, smid breast cancer luminal a up and smid breast cancer basal up respectively). number of cells (n) and patients (p) with sensitive (s) versus resistant (r) tumors by arm: letrozole alone, n=46,986, p=11, s=6, r=5; intermittent high-dose ribociclib, n=27,790, p=12, s=6, r=6; and continuous low-dose ribociclib, n=34,543, p=11, s=4, r=7. b, loh of the estrogen receptor gene (esr1) associated with reduced average expression in pretreatment biopsies (two-sided mann–whitney u-test). violin curves show distribution of average esr1 expression in tumors with or without loh. points indicate patient-specific averages (color indicates treatment and shape signifies tumor response). box and whisker plots indicate the median and upper/lower quantiles of patient tumor expression, with whiskers signifying the data range. c, reduction in esr1 expression accelerated under combination treatments, compared to endocrine therapy (columns indicate letrozole versus ribociclib treatments). violin curves show the distribution of single-cell expression during each treatment (color). expression normalized relative to the baseline average (gray dashed line). hierarchical generalized additive models predict changes in expression during treatment, accounting for initial patient-specific difference (colored curves). number of cells (n) and patients (p) with sensitive (s) versus resistant (r) tumors by arm are same as in a.']. Reference sentences:[two patients had substantially higher mutation burden compared to average (supplementary table 4) and shared a distinct mutational signature enriched in apobec signatures 2 and 13 (extended data fig 3).analysis of the pathway trajectories showed that persistent tumors treated with endocrine therapy alone maintained estrogen signaling fol- lowing treatment (measured by hallmark estrogen response early signature) indicating little or no sensitivity to therapy (t = 0.77 p = 0.45) whereas shrinking tumors showed a significant but modest decrease in estrogen signaling (fig 3a) (t = −2.138 p < 0.05).in contrast combination therapy caused a stark decrease in estrogen signaling during treat- ment in persistent tumors (t = −2.721 p = 0.05) demonstrating acquisition of a low-estrogen-dependent state with diminished endocrine signaling activity (fig 3a).during combination therapy diminished er expression and pathway activity was accompanied by a transition from luminal-like to basal-like characteristics (fig 3a) (transition under high-dose combination therapy: t = 2.85 p < 0.05; low-dose: t = 2.97 p < 0.05).in line with other studies we found from the wes data that loss of heterozygosity (loh) in esr1 also significantly diminished expression of esr1 messenger rna (fig 3b; w = 20 p < 0.05) including some pretreatment samples indicating innate resistance to endocrine therapy2731.combination therapy accelerated the reduction of esr1 mrna levels over time (esr1 reduction: t = −31.54 p < 0.001) (fig 3c) with persis- tent tumors showing the most dramatic reductions in expression (t = −80.28 p < 0.001).]
Patterns related to trajectory: transition from luminal-like to basal-like characteristics, decrease in estrogen signaling, and reduction in esr1 expression under combination therapy.

Text 372
10.1038/s43018-021-00215-7
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 4 | jnk pathway activation occurs during the emergence of combination therapy resistance and is associated with estrogen independence and increased cdk6 expression. a, jnk pathway activity increases during treatments (columns) in resistant tumors (red) compared to sensitive tumors (blue) at day 14 and in cancer cells of most tumors by end of treatment (day 180). pathway trends determined using hierarchical regression (solid lines). tumor pathway trajectories are shown (dashed lines) along with confidence intervals of model estimates (shaded regions) (jnk ssgsea pathway,st jnk mapk). number of cells (n) and patients (p) with sensitive (s) versus resistant (r) tumors by arm: letrozole alone, n=46,986, p=11, s=6, r=5; intermittent high-dose ribociclib, n=27,790, p=12, s=6, r=6; and continuous low-dose ribociclib, n=34,543, p=11, s=4, r=7. b, heat map of correlation between mapk gene expression, showing the dichotomy between jnk and erk activating genes across treatments (esr1, erbb4 and fgfr2 receptors added to indicate their relationship to mapk genes). number of cells (n) and patients (p) with sensitive (s) versus resistant (r) tumors by arm are same as in a. c, end-of-trial expression of cdk6 (ribociclib target gene) in subclonal tumor populations with differing levels of jnk activation (phenotype integrates across mapk gene expression) and for patients with cdk6 genetic amplification (triangles and blue curves) or normal copy number (circles and red curves). generalized additive models describe the relationship between jnk signaling activity and cdk6 expression at end of therapy (curves), with shaded regions indicating model confidence bands. average estrogen receptor (esr1) expression is shown for each subclonal population with differing jnk activation (point color gradient). number of cells (n) and patients (p) with sensitive (s) versus resistant (r) tumors by arm are the same as in a.']. Reference sentences:[when summarized at the pathway level cell cycle tgf-β and tp53 pathway-related genes were frequently mutated in this cohort (extended data fig 4 and supplementary table 6).the jnk and erk pathways are major component of the mapk network along with the p38 mapk pathway; both showed divergent patterns of activity following combination therapy but not endocrine therapy alone (fig 4a extended data fig 6 and supplementary table 10).the jnk pathway was upregulated during combination therapy in resistant tumor cells at day 14 but not in sensitive cells (fig 4a) (high-dose t = 3.10 p < 0.01 low-dose: t = 2.40 p < 0.05 resistant fig 2 | evolution of genomic mutations in response to endocrine or combination therapy.significant activation of the jnk pathway score was not seen in resistant tumors treated with endocrine ther- apy alone (fig 4a) (t = 0.81 p = 0.44) indicating its specific role in cdk inhibitor resistance.pathway level analysis also showed an inverse relationship in some patients (fig 4b).across each subclone in all tumors average cdk6 expression was calculated along with jnk activa- tion levels (fig 4c red line).in addition to expression levels in copy-number neutral cells we also separately analyzed jnk levels in subclones with amplified cdk6 (fig 4c blue line; no patients in arm b had cdk6 copy-number alterations).using generalized additive models we analyzed the nonlinear cdk6–jnk relation- ship in each treatment and cdk6 amplification group (fig 4c).following combination therapy jnk activation was concur- rent with upregulation of cdk6 in patients lacking pre-existing cdk6 copy-number alterations (fig 4c) (f = 130.10 p < 0.001).subclonal populations with low esr1 expression exhibited cdk6 upregu- lation (fig 4c) (t = −3.89 p < 0.001).in patients lacking cdk6 amplification (fig 4c filled circles) estrogen loss was linked to jnk activation (t = −6.13 p < 0.001).meanwhile patients with cdk6 amplified tumors lost esr1 expression independent of jnk activity (fig 4c open triangles) (t = −0.20 p = 0.84).]
Patterns related to trajectory of jnk pathway activation and cdk6 expression in response to combination therapy resistance.

Text 373
10.1038/s43018-021-00215-7
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 6 | cell cycle reactivates during combination therapy follows the loss of estrogen receptor expression, activation of jnk1, repression of the cell cycle inhibitor cyclin-dependent kinase 2a and upregulation of cdk6 during the g1 checkpoint phase. a, cell cycle activity of resistant (red) and sensitive (blue) tumors during treatment (columns indicate regimes). trend in cell cycle activity, measured by the ssgsea biocarta cell cycle pathway, are determined by hierarchical regression (solid lines). tumor-specific trajectories are shown (dashed lines) along with confidence intervals of model estimates (shaded regions). number of cells (n) and patients (p) with sensitive (s) versus resistant (r) tumors by arm: letrozole alone, n=46,986, p=11, s=6, r=5; intermittent high-dose ribociclib, n=27,790, p=12, s=6, r=6; and continuous low-dose ribociclib, n=34,543, p=11, s=4, r=7. b, visualization of the pseudotime cell cycle reconstruction obtained using the markov model-based recat algorithm. the dynamics of key cell cycle gene expression across stages of the cell cycle (black lines) were recovered from cell-specific gene expression (points), using cyclical generalized additive models. the recovered fluctuations of cell cycle gene expression were used to identify three distinct cell cycle phases (colors; g0, g1 and s/g2), using a gaussian mixture model. cell cycle stages (clusters of cells) are colored by cell cycle phase and the distance of the point from the origin signifies the cells expression in that stage. cell cycle orientation is consistent and comparable across circular plots. c, the proportion of s/g2 phase cells (passed the g1 checkpoint) in samples from resistant and sensitive tumors (color) during each treatment (column). logistic generalized additive models describe trends in s/g2 phase cell frequency over time (solid lines) and heterogeneity across tumors (shaded regions signify confidence bands). number of cells (n) and patients (p) with sensitive (s) versus resistant (r) tumors by arm are the same as in a. d, changes in esr1, jnk1 and cdkn2a expression around the cell cycle and during treatment (columns). colored lines show the expected gene expression of cells throughout the cell cycle before (blue), during (orange) and after treatment (red). the distance from the center of the circle shows gene expression at point in the cell cycle.']. Reference sentences:[the jnk and erk pathways are major component of the mapk network along with the p38 mapk pathway; both showed divergent patterns of activity following combination therapy but not endocrine therapy alone (fig 4a extended data fig 6 and supplementary table 10).during combination therapy resistant tumors became less dependent on erk signaling (extended data fig 6) (t = −2.83 p < 0.05).this dichotomy was often consistent in cells across treatments and time points (extended data fig 6).cell cycle activity was initially inhibited by both endocrine therapy alone and combination therapy (fig 6a) (biocarta cell cycle pathway decline t = −2.728 p < 0.05).extending this algorithm the dynamics of gene expression around distinct cell cycle phases was delineated using cyclical gen- eralized additive models (fig 6b).through the reconstruction of the cell cycle from scrna-seq data (fig 6b) we recovered expected cell cycle stages including a g1 checkpoint transition where cyclin d initially rises and is followed by cdk6 expression.esr1 was expressed at consistent levels throughout the cell cycle (fig 6d).however when looking across combination therapy arms decreasing esr1 expression was observed over time accompanied by increasing expression of jnk1 and its target junb (fig 6d) (t = 2.57 p < 0.05 and t = 10.10 p < 0.001) (supplementary table 15).further during combination treatment we observed a decrease in cdk inhibitor 2a (cdkn2a (coding for p14 and p16)) (t = −3.07 p < 0.005) and an increase in cdk6 expression in the g1 to s/g2 phases (t = 4.81 p < 0.001) (fig 6d).]
Summary: Cell cycle trajectories were reconstructed using gene expression data, showing changes in key genes across different cell cycle phases during treatment.

Text 374
10.1016/j.celrep.2021.109229
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 6. pseudotemporal ordering of transcriptional changes unfolds separate disease trajectories across ca1 sublayers (a) umap plot of pseudotemporal trajectory analysis of pyr subpopulations along with discriminative dimensionality reduction via learning a tree(ddrtree) coordinates uncovers four major branches (a, b, d, and e) and segregated from two branchpoints (1 and 2). (b) distribution of pyr subpopulations (deep, sup, and pyr_es) across pseudotime trajectories. an arrowhead points to pyr_es cells located at the endpoint of branch e. (c) distribution of pyr subpopulations across pseudotime trajectories by condition (control and epileptic). (d) distribution of pyr subtypes across the trajectory topology. (e) heatmap of the top-ranked branched expression analysis modeling (beam) significant changes through progression across the trajectory from branch a (basal state) to b (epilepsy) (deep cells). each row indicates the standardized kinetic curves of a gene. (f) same as (e) for the sup-specific trajectory from basal state (branch d) to the epileptic condition (branch e). (g) pseudotime kinetics across disease trajectory for selected degs in epilepsy. (h) schematic of disease trajectories from control to epilepsy.']. Reference sentences:[low dimensional embedding of the automatically learned un- derlying trajectory produced a spanning tree revealing a topo- logical structure with four main branches (a b d and e) and two bifurcation points (1 and 2; figure 6a).most nuclei at branches a and b were from cells identified as deep whereas branches d and e were populated mostly by superficial cells (figure 6b).the tra- jectory topology suggested that the transcriptional state of single cells progresses along sublayer-specific disease trajectories from a basal state (branches a and d) to the epileptic condition (branches b and e) (figure 6c).notably epilepsy-specific pyr_es cells were retrieved at the end of the superficial epileptic e path suggesting that they may be superficial neurons at a ter- minal pathological state (figure 6b green arrowhead).by leveraging unsupervised branched expression learning we identified deviating transcriptional disease trajectories in deep and superficial pyramidal cells (figure 6).conversely figure 6.our snrna-seq analysis also disclosed an epilepsy-specific pyramidal cell population pyr_es which accumulated at the end of the superficial trajectory branch (figure 6b arrowhead).]
Patterns of disease trajectories in single cells progress from basal to epileptic states, with distinct subpopulations following separate paths.

Text 375
10.3390/cells10061462
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['figure 3. characterization of chondrocyte subtypes. (a) feature plots showing the expression of key chondrocyte markers. blue: high expression, grey: low expression. (b) umap plots of various chondrocyte subtypes in mouse knee joints. colors indicate clusters of various cell types with distinct gene expression profiles. (c) heatmap showing the scaled expression of top genes differentially expressed in each cluster. (d) violin plots showing the expression of selected markers of various chondrocyte subtypes. (e) monocle pseudotime trajectory colored based on chondrocyte clusters in (a). (f) expression of chondrocyte subtype markers on a pseudotime scale (colored based on clusters in (a)).']. Reference sentences:[this included 1625 cells expressing high levels of sox9 col2a1 and acan (figure 3a) accounting for ~65% of all stromal cells analyzed.the analysis of these chondrocytes revealed nine clusters with distinct gene expression profiles (figure 3b–d and s4ab table s4).cluster 0 showed enrichment for ucma matn3 papss2 and scrg1 (figure 3cd and s4a table s4) and was annotated ‘ucmahigh’.cluster 2 showed enrichment for mef2c ihh and pth1r markers of pre-hypertrophic chondrocytes [38–40] and this cluster was named ‘mef2chigh’ (figure 3cd and s4a).cluster 3 had unique markers krt16 m1ap ngf and srxn1 and was annotated as ‘krt16high’ (figure 3cd and s4a table s4).cluster 1 expressed high levels of cytokine-like 1 (cytl1) cilp2 and prg4 and was annotated ‘cytl1high’ (figure 3cd and s4a).clusters 7 and 8 also robustly expressed these genes but cluster 7 showed enrichment for additional genes including tnfaip6 smoc2 clu and gas1 whereas cluster 8 showed enrichment for fibroblast/fibrosis markers fibroblast- specific protein 1 (s100a4/fsp1) and col1a1 col3a1 and abi3bp in addition to npy and osteopontin (opn)/secreted phosphoprotein 1 (spp1) (figure 3cd and figure s4ad).cluster 4 expressed high levels of chil1 (chi3l1) efemp1 spon1 mgp and fxyd3 and was annotated ‘chil1high’ (figure 3cd and s4a).pseudotemporal trajectory analysis predicted a branched trajectory where divcs resided at one end while tnfaip6high and s100a4high cells were observed at the opposing end of the trajectory (figure 3ef).cells from the chil1high and neat1high clusters resided along the trajectory (figure 3de) while the krt16high and mef2chigh clusters formed distinct branches (figure 3e).notably acan bgn epyc hapln chadl gpc1 and two enzymes involved in proteoglycan metabolism papss2 and chst12 were significantly enriched in the ucmahigh krt16high and mef2chigh clusters (figure 3a and s5a).]
Summary: Trajectory analysis revealed distinct branches of chondrocyte subtypes along a pseudotime scale, with specific gene expression patterns in each cluster.

Text 376
10.1038/s41593-021-00872-y
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 5 | characterization of the rl trajectory. a, umap visualization and marker-based annotation of cell types that originate from the rl (n=12,243: n=1,018 for rl; n=1,659 for gcp; n= 6,727 for gn; and n=2,839 for ecn/ubc). b, the same umap as in a with nuclei colored by sample age (n=120 for 9 pcw; n=61 for 10 pcw; n=2,190 for 11 pcw; n=1,053 for 12 pcw; n=1,663 for 14 pcw; n=432 for 16 pcw; n=4,410 for 17 pcw; n=627 for 18 pcw; n=1,626 for 20 pcw; and n=89 for 21 pcw). c, kinetics plot showing the relative expression of rl trajectory marker genes across developmental pseudotime. dots are colored according to cell types as in a. d, dot plot showing the expression of the top ten most differentially expressed genes from the spatial transcriptional analysis of rl and egl (fig 2e and supplementary table 3). e, umap visualization of the ecn/ubc cluster including 11-, 18-, 20and 21-pcw samples. nuclei are colored by sample age (n=1,424; n= 436 for 11 pcw; n= 138 for 18 pcw; n= 842 for 20 pcw; and n= 8 for 21 pcw). f, the same umap as in e with nuclei colored by expression level for the indicated gene.']. Reference sentences:[nuclei from replicate samples processed in separate experiments were similarly distributed whereas nuclei from different developmental stages were not (extended data fig 5).overall rl comprised only 1% (1018/69174) of the total nuclei recovered from the cerebellum across develop- ment with 822 (81%) rl nuclei detected among 59608 total nuclei recovered in our largest dataset (extended data fig 5a and supplementary table 7).27) (fig 5ab).we confirmed predicted develop- mental trajectories including temporal progression and expres- sion of classic markers with one branch of the rl trajectory giving rise to gcps and then gns and the second branch giving rise to ecns/ubcs (fig 5b).as we had done for the rl com- partments we selected the top markers for rl and egl defined by our spatial rna-seq analysis (fig 2e) and examined expression of these marker genes at the single-cell level within the rl trajectory (fig 5c).the cells within this cluster were present in all ages sampled (9–21 pcw) and were distinct from other glutamatergic neurons (gcps and gns) that also originate from rl neural progenitors (fig 5).to more clearly delineate the different developmental origins of ecns and ubcs we selected cells in the ecn/ubc population from 11 pcw or 18–21 pcw subclustered the cells and examined the molecular correlates that define ecn and ubc (fig 5).a the same umap visualization of cell types that originate from the rl as in fig 5a with nuclei colored by expression level for lmx1a (red) eomes (green) and co-expression (yellow).b the same umap visualization the ecn/ubc subcluster as in fig 5e with nuclei colored by expression level for lmx1a (red) eomes (green) and co-expression (yellow).]
Patterns related to the trajectory of cell development from rl neural progenitors, including temporal progression and expression of marker genes, were analyzed across developmental pseudotime.

Text 377
10.1038/s41586-021-03670-5
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 4 | scatac–seq landscape of the developing neocortex. a, umap visualization of the scatac–seq data for each time point. cells are coloured by the cell types predicted from integration with scrna-seq datasets (top) and modality (bottom). b, c, urd chromatin accessibility trajectories. root is e13.5 progenitors, tips are e18.5 final cell types (with identity-prediction score > 70%). cells are coloured by their predicted identity (b) or accessibility of marker genes (c). d, tf motifs enriched along the atac tree. the dot size shows fold enrichment, and the colour is the average rna expression in nearest cells in the integrated rna and atac data. motif enrichment was calculated for sequential segments of the tree; plot separation indicates the second']. Reference sentences:[we used a diffusion pseudotime-based approach; alternative algorithms made similar inferences (extended data fig 4a b methods).the resulting tree accurately reflected differentiation status age and expression of known markers (fig 3a extended data fig 4e–g 5a).monocle3 produced a similar structure (extended data fig 4c d) but other trajectory-finding algorithms produced results that were less consistent with previous biological knowledge.notably the tree showed progenitors diverging as early as e13.5 into glial and neuronal branches (extended data fig 4e).monocle3 similarly inferred post-mitotic branching of cpn and cfupn (extended data fig 4c).co-embedding the scatac–seq and scrna-seq data in a shared umap space (methods) closely interleaved both data modalities (fig 4a bot- tom) indicating that chromatin accessibility captured the full cell-type spectra identified by gene expression.we used the scatac–seq gene activities to build a developmental trajectory tree of cortical cells (fig 4b).in this tree cells progressed in pseudotime according to both age and differentiation state (fig 4b c extended data fig 9b c) with a comparable structure to that of a reduced scrna-seq tree including the same three time points (extended data fig 9d).notably putative near-projecting neurons910 were the only population that was assigned to different branches in the trees (compare fig 4b with fig 3a) which suggests that these neurons may be molecularly related to both cfupn and deep-layer cpn.we extracted the common cre across time points and clustered them at each age identifying differentiation- and cell-type-associated patterns (fig 4e methods).this identified both known and new identity regulators at different ages (fig 4d).subtype-specific enrichment emerged at later ages including motifs for cux1 cux2 and pou3f2 in layers 2&3 cpn29; bcl11b tbr1 and fezf2 in cfupn along with nfe2l3 nfia and hivep2; and hes5 sox9 and klf3 in astrocytes (fig 4e extended data fig 10f).extended data fig 4 | see next page for caption.article extended data fig 4 | consistent ordering of cells in developmental trajectories and characterization of branching tree of cortical development.related to fig 4. a scatac–seq data per time point.related to fig 4. a total number of accessible sites identified per time point and fraction that is dynamic across cell types (that is is enriched in at least one cell type).]
Patterns of cell differentiation and identity progression along a developmental trajectory in single-cell data.

Text 378
10.1038/s41586-021-03670-5
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 3 | molecular developmental trajectories of neocortical cell types. a, urd branching tree. root is e10.5 earliest progenitors, tips are p4 terminal cell types. cells are coloured by their identity. b, smoothened heat map of lineage-specific gene cascades for layers 2&3 cpn and scpn. gene expression in each row is scaled to maximum observed expression, and smoothened. genes are ordered on the basis of their onset and peak expression timings. some marker genes are labelled. the cascade is divided into three segments: shared trajectory, layer 2&3 cpn-specific trajectories and scpn-specific trajectories. full cascades are shown in extended data fig 7 and supplementary table 3. c, gene programs of connected modules found by']. Reference sentences:[the learned spatial distribution of each cell type was consistent with their expected positions (fig 2a extended data fig 3a–c supplementary table 1).tangram mapped each population to specific positions as early as p1 consistent with their locations at later ages9–11 (extended data fig 3d e).mapping to the slide-seq data revealed sequential apical-to-distal positions (fig 2b extended data fig 3f).we applied urd12 trajectory inference to generate a branched trajectory tree based on the transcriptional similarity of pseudotime-ordered cells (fig 3a methods).the resulting tree accurately reflected differentiation status age and expression of known markers (fig 3a extended data fig 4e–g 5a).the early shared portion of the neuronal trajectory showed down- regulation of cell-cycle-related genes (gadd45g) transient expres- sion of neurogenesis- (neurog2) and migration-associated genes (sstr2 neurod1) and upregulation of pan-neuronal genes (neurod2 tubb3) (fig 3b).therefore we identified gene modules across each time point by non-negative matrix factorization (nmf)12 annotated them using their top-ranked genes and chained modules from consecutive time points12 to define ‘genetic programs’ that repre- sent different aspects of corticogenesis (fig 3c extended data fig 6f g supplementary table 4 methods).although some programs were associated with broad developmental processes such as radial glia iden- tity neurogenesis and neuronal migration neuronal lineage-specific programs became distinguishable at e13.5 supporting a shared devel- opmental trajectory that diverges post-mitotically (fig 3c).the top-ranked transcription factors (tfs) and dna-binding pro- teins for each daughter branch included both tfs that are known to govern cell identity acquisition (for example bcl11b fezf2 satb2) and novel candidate regulators such as chgb for cthpn ndn for layer 6b neurons and msx3 for layer 4 neurons (fig 3d extended data fig 8c).notably putative near-projecting neurons910 were the only population that was assigned to different branches in the trees (compare fig 4b with fig 3a) which suggests that these neurons may be molecularly related to both cfupn and deep-layer cpn.the predicted cre of the top 40 genes by importance score (fig 3d methods) were enriched for distinct tf binding sites: fezf2 and bcl11b for the cfupn branch and pou3f2 and pou3f1 for the cpn branch (extended data fig 10d).a gene programs of connected modules (as in fig 3c) coloured by fezf2 score.using these mappings cell-type annotations were transferred onto space which we used to produce fig 2 and extended data fig 3.for extended data fig 3d at time point p1 we focused on a small roi which captures the cellular diversity of layers 5 and 6 including scpn cthpn cpn and near-projecting and layer 6b neurons.to verify that this deterministic assignment led to a unique choice we computed the mean and the standard deviation of the probability scores of each cell type separating the voxels according to the assigned identity (extended data fig 3e) and confirmed that for spots assigned to a given cell type the probability of that cell type is higher than other types.we selected the top 20 genes (extended data fig 8a) or tfs (fig 3d) by importance scores per branching point.extended data fig 3 | see next page for caption.article extended data fig 3 | spatial mappings of cell types in the developing cerebral cortex.related to fig 3. a umap visualizations of the scrna-seq data from combined time points with cells coloured by pseudotime inferred by different methods.c umap visualization of the cells used for trajectory building (same as cells used for fig 3a and related figures) coloured by cell type (left) and pseudotime (right) on which a developmental trajectory was calculated using monocle3.related to fig 3. a branching trees showing the expression of marker genes of apical progenitors (sox2 hes5) intermediate progenitors (eomes) and excitatory neurons (neurod2) as well as genes characteristic of the dorsally-derived cortical cell types including callosal neurons (satb2 cux2) layer 4 stellate neurons (rorb) corticofugal neurons (fezf2 tle4 pcp4 tcerg1l) putative near- projecting neurons (tshz2) astrocytes (slc1a3 aqp4 aldh1l1) and ependymocytes (foxj1).related to fig 3. a–d new expression patterns emerging from the inferred tree.related to fig 3.related to fig 3. a feature importance (0.5 power transformed dot size) and average expression of genes predicted to be involved in cell-type divergence (row-scaled colour).d tf binding sites enrichment on accessible sites of cells in the cpn vs cfupn branch-point (see fig 3d) shows significant enrichment of some of the tf detected in fig 3d suggesting an actual role in this step.]
Summary: Identification of developmental trajectories based on gene expression patterns in single cells, reflecting differentiation status and cell identity acquisition.

Text 379
10.1038/s41420-021-00542-9
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 4 features of dynamically changing genes over temporal trajectories. a cell state transition according to the pseudotime path. there are four major states over pseudotime. b expression patterns of the top five degs over pseudotime. c heatmap of ribosomal protein genes in the top 50 degs of the pseudotime path are significantly changed in the pseudotime path. all of these genes were highly expressed at the earlier stage and decreased during time. d top five tfs in the top 200 degs over the pseudotime are listed and the expression patterns of these tfs over pseudotime were mapped. e tfs enriched in the six major kidney cell types are listed. the genes highlighted in red in each box were top five tfs among the top 200 degs over the pseudotime. all of the top five tfs were enriched in podocytes indicating the important role of podocytes during these development stages. degs differentially expressed genes, tfs transcriptional factors.']. Reference sentences:[first the top five degs in pseudotime were identified and 3/5 were genes that encode ribosomal proteins and related proteins (fig 4a b).as shown in fig 4b c at the start of postnatal kidney development in rats these genes were highly expressed and gradually decreased during pseudotime.figure 4d lists the top five tfs among the top 200 degs over pseudotime.moreover the tfs enriched in six major kidney cell types are also listed in fig 4e.]
Summary: Expression patterns of dynamically changing genes and transcription factors over pseudotime trajectories in kidney cell development.

Text 380
10.1038/s41420-021-00542-9
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 3 distinct phases of major kidney cell clusters during the development of postnatal rat kidney. a, b pseudotime trajectory of the major kidney cells (collecting duct intercalated cells, collecting duct principal cells, distal convoluted tubules, loop of henle, podocytes, and proximal tubules). cells are colored based on the predicted pseudotime. the deeper the color, the earlier it is (a). cell type transition during the development of rat kidney after birth according to pseudotime path (b). c split monocle pseudotime plot revealed detailed development of the major kidney cell clusters. d overview of different cell cluster fates along cumulative time as indicated by pseudotime. numbers 1–5 present the ordering of cell type induction based on pseudotime. podocytes were the first cell type to be induced from the progenitors and to reach their mature fate, followed by the loop of henle and collecting duct principal cells, and then distal convoluted tubules and collecting duct intercalated cells, with proximal tubules being the final mature cell type observed kidney development.']. Reference sentences:[as shown in fig 3a b the initiation period was not limited to one or two cell populations because of the period of time of samples we chose.as shown in fig 3c the split trajectories of each cell type showed that pd was the first cell type presented and fated to mature followed by loh and cd-pc which were ordered by dct and cd-ic.in detail the accurate order was determined in this study when combined with previous studies describing the state from progenitor cells to maturity (fig 3d).]
Summary: Trajectory analysis reveals the sequential development of major cell types in the kidney postnatally, from progenitors to mature cells.

Text 381
10.1186/s13059-021-02414-y
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 1 inferring differentiation trajectories at organismal scale. a pijuan-sala et al. [25] layout containing single-cell transcriptomes from e6.5 to e8.5, colored by sampled timepoint (left) and by cell-type (right). the overlaying arrows result from applying the scvelo pipeline to the whole embryonic dataset and represent inferred developmental trajectories. arrowheads highlight the erythroid branch, displaying scvelo trajectory predictions that are inconsistent with real-time sampling. b pijuan-sala et al. [25] layout highlighting singlecell transcriptomes belonging to e7.5 (left) and e8.5 (right) and colored by cell-type (see legend in a). the overlaying arrows result from applying the scvelo pipeline to these individual timepoints and represent inferred developmental trajectories. arrowheads highlight the erythroid branch']. Reference sentences:[we first applied scvelo to the normalized and batch-corrected count matrix across all embryonic stages (fig 1a).we next repeated this analysis using data from each individual timepoint (fig 1b; shown are e7.5 and e8.5).single-cell transcriptomes are colored by cell- type annotation; see fig 1 for full legend.e zoomed-in umap of the erythroid branch (see fig 1 for full umap) with scvelo calculations before and after removing murk genes identified in b.the dataset analyzed in fig 1 2 3 of this study is published in pijuan-sala et al.]
Inferred developmental trajectories of cells from e6.5 to e8.5, highlighting the erythroid branch inconsistency with real-time sampling.

Text 382
10.1038/s41588-021-00894-z
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 5 | multi-omic oligodendrocyte trajectory analysis. a, umap dimensionality reduction of oligodendrocytes from the integrated snatac-seq (n=58,221 nuclei) and snrna-seq (n=36,773 nuclei) analysis. each cell is colored by its pseudotime trajectory assignment. b, scatterplot showing the proportion of oligodendrocyte nuclei from ad samples at 50 evenly sized bins across the trajectory. the black line shows a linear regression, and the gray outline represents the 95% ci. pearson correlation coefficient and p value from two-sided test are shown. c, scatterplot of module scores for nf-odc, mf-odc and mature odc gene signatures36,37 (see supplementary note for full gene lists) averaged for nuclei in each of the 50 trajectory bins. solid colored lines represent loess regressions for each signature, and the gray outlines represent 95% cis. d, left: heatmap of chromatin accessibility at 9,231 oligodendrocyte gl-ccres reconstructed using rvae. right: heatmap of gene expression for 1,563 oligodendrocyte t-degs reconstructed using rvae. annotated genes are degs in oligodendrocytes, with respect to other cell types, or ad upregulated genes in oligodendrocytes. e, 2d latent space learned by rvae modeling of oligodendrocyte t-degs (left) and gl-ccres (right), where each dot represents one gene. left: genes colored by trajectory rank, the point in the trajectory where the gene reaches 75% of max expression. right: genes colored by correlation of rvae reconstructed expression with ad diagnosis proportion as in b. f, oligodendrocyte t-deg latent space colored by correlation of reconstructed gene expression to nrf1 (left) and srebf1 (right) motif variability. the shape of each point represents the regulatory relationship between the tf and each gene, while genes without regulatory evidence are shown as small gray dots. annotated genes are ad upregulated genes in oligodendrocytes (ad degs). tf binding motifs are shown as motif logos.']. Reference sentences:[additionally we confirmed cell-type identities by gene activity and gene expres- sion in a panel of canonical cell-type marker genes (supplementary fig 3) and used seurat’s label-transfer algorithm to verify cell-type annotations in the snatac-seq dataset using the snrna-seq data- set as a reference (supplementary fig 5).for a given tf we identified candidate target genes as those whose promoters or linked ccres are accessible and con- tain the tf’s binding motif in the cell type of interest and we repeated this for several select tfs generating microglia-specific and oligodendrocyte-specific tf regulatory networks (fig 4gh extended data fig 5b and supplementary note).we constructed an integrated oligodendrocyte trajectory using 58221 nuclei from snatac-seq and 36773 nuclei from snrna-seq (fig 5a) noting that the proportion of nuclei from late-stage ad samples appeared to increase along the trajectory (fig 5b; pearson correlation r = 0.32 p value = 0.022).to clarify the func- tional state of oligodendrocytes associated with late-stage ad we examined the gene expression signatures3637 of newly formed oligodendrocytes (nf-odcs) myelin-forming oligodendrocytes (mf-odcs) and mature oligodendrocytes (mature odcs; fig 5c; see supplementary note for gene signature lists).chromatin accessibility of 9231 oligodendrocyte gl-ccres and gene expression of 1563 oligodendrocyte t-degs reconstructed with a rvae showcases the vast amount of chro- matin remodeling and transcriptional reprogramming that may underlie oligodendrocyte maturation (fig 5d).additionally the latent feature space (z) learned by the rvae provides further biological insight into the pseudotime trajec- tory and gene regulation in disease (fig 5e).we then correlated the reconstructed feature trajectories as in fig 5d to the proportion of late-stage ad nuclei as in fig 5b to see which features con- sistently changed with ad.we correlated tf motif variability trajectories (extended data fig 6) with the reconstructed t-deg expression trajectories and visualized the correlation between the tf and each gene within the 2d latent space identifying candidate target genes activated or repressed by tf binding events (positive or negative trajectory cor- relation respectively; fig 5f and supplementary note).b scatterplot of the proportion of ad microglia nuclei as in fig 5b.c scatterplot of module scores as in fig 5c for gene signatures from keren-shaul et al.40: homeostatic microglia stage 1 dam and stage 2 dam (see supplementary note for full gene lists).d heatmaps of rvae reconstructed chromatin accessibility and gene expression as in fig 5d for 9163 microglia gl-ccres (left) and 2138 microglia t-degs (right).e 2d latent space learned by rvae modeling of microglia t-degs (left) and gl-ccres (right) as in fig 5e.f microglia t-deg latent space colored by correlation of gene expression to spi1 (left) and etv5 (right) motif variability as in fig 5f.]
Summary: Trajectory analysis of oligodendrocytes reveals gene expression changes along a developmental path in Alzheimer's disease.

Text 383
10.1038/s41588-021-00894-z
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 6 | multi-omic microglia and astrocyte trajectory analyses. a, umap dimensionality reduction of microglia from the integrated snatac-seq (n=10,768 nuclei) and snrna-seq (n=4,119 nuclei) analysis. b, scatterplot of the proportion of ad microglia nuclei as in fig 5b. c, scatterplot of module scores as in fig 5c for gene signatures from keren-shaul et al.40: homeostatic microglia, stage 1 dam and stage 2 dam (see supplementary note for full gene lists). d, heatmaps of rvae reconstructed chromatin accessibility and gene expression as in fig 5d, for 9,163 microglia gl-ccres (left) and 2,138 microglia t-degs (right). e, 2d latent space learned by rvae modeling of microglia t-degs (left) and gl-ccres (right), as in fig 5e. f, microglia t-deg latent space colored by correlation of gene expression to spi1 (left) and etv5 (right) motif variability, as in fig 5f. g, umap dimensionality reduction of astrocytes from the integrated snatac-seq (n=12,112 nuclei) and snrna-seq (n=4,704 nuclei) analysis. h, scatterplot of the proportion of ad astrocyte nuclei as in b. i, scatterplot of module scores as in c for gene signatures from habib et al.29: gfap-low, gfap-high and daas (see supplementary note for full gene lists). j, heatmaps of rvae reconstructed chromatin accessibility and gene expression as in d for 12,487 astrocyte gl-ccres (left) and 1,797 astrocyte t-degs (right). k, 2d latent space learned by rvae modeling of astrocyte t-degs (left) and gl-ccres (right), as in e. l, astrocyte t-deg latent space colored by correlation of gene expression to ctcf (left) and etv5 (right) motif variability, as in f.']. Reference sentences:[in both snatac-seq and snrna-seq we discovered multiple neuronal and glial subpopulations and we annotated the subpopulations from snrna-seq based on previ- ously identified marker genes14 (fig 2 supplementary fig 6 and 7 and supplementary note).for our snatac-seq clusters we used seurat’s label-transfer algorithm to calculate cluster prediction scores allowing for supervised annotation of our cell clusters in which we mapped ex.a to ex1 and asc.b to asc2 for example (supplementary fig 6 and 7).for each cell type we identified genes that were differentially expressed along the trajectory (t-degs; supplementary data 7) and used these genes as features to train the rvae until the loss function converged (supplementary note and extended data fig 6).we correlated tf motif variability trajectories (extended data fig 6) with the reconstructed t-deg expression trajectories and visualized the correlation between the tf and each gene within the 2d latent space identifying candidate target genes activated or repressed by tf binding events (positive or negative trajectory cor- relation respectively; fig 5f and supplementary note).using the same analytical approach as that used for our oligoden- drocyte trajectory analysis we constructed an integrated microglia trajectory using 10768 nuclei from snatac-seq and 4119 nuclei from snrna-seq (fig 6a).the proportion of nuclei from late-stage ad samples significantly increased throughout the microglia tra- jectory (fig 6b; pearson correlation r = 0.53 p value = 6.9 × 10−5).to further dissect the microglia trajectory we modeled the chro- matin accessibility and gene expression dynamics of 9163 microg- lia gl-ccres and 2138 microglia t-degs respectively using rvae (fig 6de).we highlight two ets family tfs spi1 and ets vari- ant 5 (etv5) both of which showed upregulated motif variability in late-stage ad (bonferroni-adjusted p values 1.19 × 10−20 and 6.68 × 10−19 respectively) and their candidate target genes along the trajectory (fig 6f and supplementary note).we also constructed an integrated astrocyte trajectory using 12112 nuclei from snatac-seq and 4704 nuclei from snrna-seq (fig 6g) and we again found that the proportion of late-stage ad nuclei significantly increased throughout the trajectory (fig 6h; pearson correlation r = 0.57 p value = 1.9 × 10−5).based on daa gene signature analysis we reasoned that this trajectory fol- lows a trend from a gfap-low state to gfap-high and daa-like states (fig 6i; see supplementary note for gene signature lists).rvae modeling of 12487 astrocyte gl-ccres and 1797 astro- cyte t-degs revealed rich gene-regulatory dynamics across the trajectory (fig 6jk).ctcf is known as a master chromatin regulator4142 and we observed that the ctcf motif variability trajectory was anti-correlated with the daa and gfap-high signatures (end of the trajectory; extended data fig 6) and positively correlated with t-degs in the gfap-low phase of the trajectory (fig 6l).alternatively we found a positive correla- tion between the motif variability trajectory of fosl2 with the gfap-high and daa gene signatures and a positive correlation with genes at the end of the trajectory (fig 6l and supplementary note).]
Summary: Trajectory analysis reveals gene expression changes along cell differentiation paths, correlated with transcription factor motif variability.

Text 384
10.1038/s41556-021-00740-8
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 2 | characterization of divergent pigment developmental trajectories in volar and non-volar melanocytes. a, schematic of the cohort of donor-matched non-volar and volar skin. n=6 donors and n=20 total skin samples (supplementary table 1). b,c, raw (b) and average normalized (c) bsc values of volar and non-volar cutaneous melanocytes before 18 f.w. (pre-bifurcation) and at/after 18 f.w. (post-bifurcation). statistical analysis was performed using two-sided wilcoxon rank-sum tests; bonferroni multiple-testing-adjusted p values: ns, p=0.25; p=3.6×10−165. for c, the box plots show the interquartile range (box limits) with median (centre line), s.d. (whiskers) and outliers (grey circles). d, fontana–masson staining for melanin/ melanosomes in fetal and adult non-volar and volar skin. representative images from n=3 for each age. scale bars, 50µm. e, increased pigment content coincides with the upregulation of the pigment transcriptional program in cutaneous melanocytes at 18 f.w. normalized mean expression of 170 pigment-associated genes (thin lines) in volar (blue) and non-volar cutaneous (red) melanocytes. the thick lines show the average expression of all pigment associated genes. f, the mean expression of the 14 pigment genes with significant differential expression between non-volar and volar melanocytes from both adult donors; colour and size corresponds to the fold change between sites. g, the fold change in the expression of the degs in f for each donor-matched age. lineage genes, melanocyte lineage-specific genes. bifurcation-associated, genes with significant differential expression coinciding with pigment bifurcation (between 12f.w. and 18f.w.). post-bifurcation, genes with significant differential expression only in donor-matched adults. statistical analysis was performed using unpaired two-tailed t-tests; p=0.0278; p=0.0013; p=3.3×10−5. the box plot shows the full range of data values (minimum to maximum values; box limits) and the mean (supplementary table 2). h, schematic of the identification of pigment genes associated with intraindividual pigmentation divergence between non-volar cutaneous and volar melanocytes.']. Reference sentences:[individual cells were designated as cycling or non-cycling on the basis of the expression of established marker genes20 (extended data fig 2).using bsc we queried the relative pigmentation between donor-matched volar and non-volar mela- nocytes (fig 2a and supplementary table 1 (asterisks)).and 12 f.w. there were no detectable differences in bsc (fig 2bc).and adulthood (fig 2bc).in non-volar cutaneous skin with no evidence of staining in donor-matched volar skin (fig 2d).(fig 2e (bold red line)) the expression pat- terns of individual pigment-associated genes were varied (fig 2e (thin red lines)).; and post-bifurcation genes genes that are upregulated in adult non-volar cutaneous melano- cytes (fig 2fg).lineage genes included melanocyte differentiation genes and master regulators of melanin production (sox10 pax3 mitf dct tyrp1 tyr and pmel) whereas bifurcation genes and post-bifurcation genes were involved in melanosome biogen- esis and function (slc45a2 tpcn2 oca2 rab27a ap3d1 adam10 trappc6a slc24a5 and atox1) and/or pigment sig- nalling pathways/ultraviolet response (mc1r gnas and dstyk; fig 2h and supplementary table 2).here our approach pinpointed pigment genes with differential expression correlated with intraindividual pigment variation (fig 2h).to 77 years and different sexes and skin tones for transcriptional programs that distinguished volar versus non-volar cutaneous melanocytes across developmental ages (n = 6 donors n = 20 skin specimens; fig 2a and supplementary table 1 (asterisks)).]
Summary: Differential expression patterns of pigment-associated genes in single cells from volar and non-volar melanocytes across developmental stages.

Text 385
10.1038/s41421-021-00312-y
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 5 cell subpopulations in the t cell compartment. a t-sne plot showing a total of 86,803 cells classified into t/nk cell subtypes. b bar plot exhibiting the distribution of t24 and t36 cells across different tissues (left). volcano plot showing degs between the t24 and t36 clusters (middle). each red/blue dot denotes an individual gene with fold change ≥ 2 and adjusted p value < 0.01 (two-sided moderated t-test with limma). go analysis of degs between t24 and t36 (right). selected go terms with benjamini-hochberg-corrected p values < 0.05 (one-sided fisher’s exact test) are shown. bottom, based on the annotation and classification above, bar plots depicting cell numbers of each subtype of cd8+ t cells (c) and cd4+ t cells (d) in tumors with or without pc treatment are shown. top, pie charts showing the proportions of different t cell subtypes within different tissues (the primary crc, liver metastases, and blood). left, frequencies of cd8+ dysfunctional t cells (e) and tregs (f) in primary crc and liver metastases with or without pc treatment are shown, respectively. wilcoxon rank-sum test was used for statistical analysis. p < 0.05. developmental trajectory analysis of cd8+ t cells (e) and cd4+ t cells (f). cells are colored according to the treatment states. g the facs results showing the ratio of pd-1+cd8+ t cells to cd8+ t cells in liver metastases of crc patients treated with or without pc.']. Reference sentences:[pc reduces cd8+ dysfunctional t cells here we also identified different phenotypes of t cells (fig 5a) including naïve t cells (tn) central memory t cells (tcm) intraepithelial lymphocytes (iels) tissue- resident memory t cells (trm)/effector memory t cells (tem) recently activated effector memory t cells (temra) dysfunctional or “exhausted” t cells (tex) th17-like cells cxcl13+ th1-like cells mki67+ t cells and regulatory t cells (tregs).in addition we also identified two mki67+cd8+ t cell populations (t36 and t24) (fig 5a).cell discovery (2021) 7:80 page 10 of 21 of these two clusters revealed that cluster 36 was pre- valent in the liver metastases (fig 5b 96% in liver and 4% in the primary crc) whereas cluster 24 was enriched in both the primary crc and the liver (53% in crc and 45% in liver) indicating that primary crc and liver metastases share cluster 24 while the liver metastases have their specific t cells characterized by high proliferation activity (t36).to identify differences of these two subpopulations of t cells we detected differentially expressed genes (degs) between t24 and t36 expressed by more than 10% cells with the p value less than 1% log2-fold change more than l. the results revealed that heat-shock protein such as hsp90aa1 hspa6 hspa1a hspa1b and dnaja4 and some molecular chaperones (e.g. bag3 and hspb1) were greatly upregulated in cluster 36 (fig 5b).comparing the cellular diversity of t cells in treatment-naïve tumors and tumors treated with pc we found that most subsets of cd4+ t cells were shared in chemotherapy-treated and untreated tumors however the phenotypes of cd8+ t cells were significantly dif- ferent (fig 5c d).in treatment-naïve tumors different types of cd8+ t cells were present in the primary tumor including effector t cells and exhausted t cells while in the metastatic sites for the cd8+ t cells only dysfunctional or exhausted t cells were accumulated (fig 5c).most significantly pc inhibited the accumulation of dysfunc- tional t cells both in the niches of primary crc and liver metastases (fig 5e).this was validated by ﬂow cytometry (fig 5g and supplementary fig s4d) and immuno- ﬂuorescence analyses (supplementary fig s5).consistent with previous studies5859 chemotherapy decreased the accumulation of tregs in the primary crc but in liver metastases the abundance of tregs were comparable between treated and untreated tumors (fig 5f).the dif- ferentiation trajectories of cd8+ and cd4+ t cells (fig 5e f and supplementary fig s4e f) also confirmed that the cd8+ dysfunctional t cells were most prevalent in treatment-naïve tumors whereas the tregs were shared in treated and untreated tumors.]
The trajectory analysis of CD8+ and CD4+ T cells reveals distinct cell states and responses to treatment, including changes in dysfunctional T cells and Tregs.

Text 386
10.1038/s41586-021-03852-1
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 3 | cells of the developing enteric nervous system. a, b, umap of enteric neural crest cells (encc) and their progeny at 6–11 (a) and 12–17 (b) pcw. overlaid arrows depict scvelo trajectories, with major neuronal branches shown as a and b. marker genes for populations are listed. branch a2 and a3 subsets were not observed at 12–17 pcw, possibly because they were outnumbered by the glial populations. c, d, multiplex smfish staining of scgn branch a1, grp branch a2/a3 and bnc2 branch b1/2 developing elavl4 neurons (arrows, n=2) in the 15 pcw ileum (scale bars, 100µm) (c) and glia 1 (dhh, mpz, sox10) cells in the mesentery (scale bars: main, 100µm; expansion, 30µm. n=2 (d)). n represents the number of biological replicates across regions. e, heat map showing the mean expression of genes associated with hscr across intestinal regions and developmental stages. imn, inhibitory motor neuron; ipan, primary afferent neurons; in, interneurons, int., intestine.']. Reference sentences:[using differential cell-type abundance analysis14 we identified their region-specific expression signatures (fig 1e extended data fig 3a–d).notably small-intestinal best4 cells were marked by high expression of the gene cftr which encodes a chloride channel and is mutated in cystic fibrosis (fig 1e); such high expression was also observed at the protein level (extended data fig 3e).in this staining and in previous work best4 cells were in close proximity to cells that resembled goblet cells12 (extended data fig 3f).our analysis highlights a possible role of best4 enterocytes of the small intestine in aiding mucus production by goblet cells and biosynthesis of acids in contrast to the functions of colonic best4 cells in the metabolism of small molecules (extended data fig 3g 4a b).key genes are highlighted in red and the full milo analysis can be found in extended data fig 3d.development of the enteric nervous system next we investigated the differentiation of neural cells from enteric neural crest cell (encc) progenitors (fig 3a b) that were present in the dataset from 6.5 pcw (extended data fig 8a).in early development enccs differentiated primarily to neurons via neuroblasts giving rise to two distinct branches: branch a (etv1) and branch b (bnc2) (fig 3a extended data fig 8c 9a–d) as has been observed in mice22.branch b further differentiated to immature excitatory motor neuron (emn) subsets (branches b1 and b2 resembling enc1–enc322) (fig 3a).at later development branch a differentiated into neu- rod6-expressing interneurons (resembling enc1022) whereas branch b differentiated into ipans (fig 3b extended data fig 8c 9a–d) simi- lar to previously described adult human ipan a cells23.we visualize opposing expression of scgn (branch a1) and grp (branch a2 and a3) and bnc2 (branch b1 and b2) in the developing and adult human myenteric plexus (fig 3c extended data fig 8e).three types of enteric neural and a subset of differentiating glia (col20a1) were present at 12–17 pcw (fig 3b extended data fig 9a–d).we visualized bmp8b-expressing cells in the myenteric plexus whereas dhh-expressing cells were found both in the mesentery and the myen- teric plexus (fig 3d extended data fig 8f).the majority of hscr-associated genes were expressed across mul- tiple differentiating populations with varying intensity (fig 3e) and varied between neuron branches a and b.notably zeb2 and ednrb were more highly expressed across colonic glia and neuroblast subsets compared to equivalent small intestinal subsets (fig 3e).subpopulations of the branches were named a1–a4 and b1–b3 and combinatorial gene mark- ers are provided in fig 3a b.three types of enteric glia (s100b cryab mpz) were observed: glia 1 (dhh rxrg ntrk2 mbp) glia 2 (eln tfap2a sox8 bmp8b) glia 3 (bcan apoe calca hes5 frzb) and a subset of differentiating glia (col20a1) were present at 12–17 pcw (fig 3b).article extended data fig 3 | region variability in best4 enterocytes.arrows show differentiation trajectory inferred from scvelo arrows as in fig 3a b. c bar plot with relative abundance of cell types among encc-lineage populations as described in (figure 3a b) across intestinal regions and developmental timepoints.]
Summary: Trajectory patterns of neural cell differentiation from progenitors, with distinct branches and gene expressions, in developing enteric nervous system.

Text 387
10.1038/s41586-021-03852-1
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 2 | epithelial cells and fcgr2a signalling in tuft cells. a, b, uniform manifold approximation and projection (umap) of fetal (a) and postnatal (b) epithelial cell types. key cell types are circled with a dashed line and arrows depict paths of differentiation towards secretory and absorptive enterocytes as determined by scvelo. m cells, microfold cells; ta, transit-amplifying. c, dot plot of tmprss2 and ace2 expression in epithelial cells in the fetal intestine as in a. d, umap of enteroendocrine (eec) and enterochromaffin (ec) cell subsets. arrows depict summarised scvelo differentiation trajectories. c9orf16 is also known as bbln. e, heat map of genes that change along the differentiation trajectory from neurog3-expressing progenitors to enterochromaffin cells (red arrow in d). arrows indicate genes that have known associations with enterochromaffin cell differentiation. f, dot plot with expression of molecules upstream or downstream of the plcg2 pathway in tuft cells and pooled absorptive (ta and enterocytes) and secretory (paneth, goblet and eec) cells. g, per cent expression of fcγ receptor by siglecf+epcam+ and siglecf−epcam+ cells in wild-type mice determined by flow cytometry (individual points represent biological replicates; n=4). using a two-way anova we observe significant interaction between fcγ receptor expression (f(3, 39)=42.29, p=3.05 × 10−11). post-hoc analysis showed significant differences between non-tuft epithelial cells and tuft cells for fcγriib (mean difference=2.80, 95% ci [1.80, 3.81], p<0.0001) and fcγriib/iii (mean difference=4.88, 95% ci [3.88, 5.89], p<0.0001) expression. padj < 0.0001 values corrected with tukey’s test for multiple comparisons. h, schematic of proposed signalling pathways in tuft cells. rtk, receptor tyrosine kinases.']. Reference sentences:[further sub-clustering of the cellular lineages enabled the identification of 133 cell types and states with specific transcriptional identities (extended data fig 2a supplementary tables 3–7).absorptive and goblet cells showed regional separation at all life stages (fig 2a b extended data fig 5a–c 6a b).given that the gut epithelium repre- sents an entry point for sars-cov-215 we also report that both ace2 and tmprss2—which encodes transmembrane serine protease 2—were expressed by enterocytes in early development (fig 2c extended data fig 6c).we delineated genes involved in the differentiation of neurog3 precursors to enterochromaffin cells including recently described genes (marked by arrows) such as fev1920 (fig 2e extended data fig 6e f).to explore the relevance of plcg2 in tuft cells we screened for the expression of upstream receptors (fig 2f extended data fig 6i).fcgr2a which is activated in response to igg and expressed by selected epithelial cells in immu- nized mice21 was specifically expressed by approximately 2.75% of tuft cells (fig 2f).we confirmed the expression of the protein fcgr3 (the mouse orthologue of human fcgr2a) by approximately 5% of small intestinal tuft cells in mice (fig 2g extended data fig 6j).because these are known to be mainly linked to plcg1 activa- tion whether they are also responsible for plcg2 activation in tuft cells is difficult to delineate (fig 2h).252 | nature | vol 597 | 9 september 2021 article with downstream signalling mediators including rac2 itpr2 prkca and trpm5 (fig 2f h)—suggested the ability of tuft cells to respond to immune-cell signalling.we observed arterial venous capillary and lymphatic endothe- lial cells (lecs) (extended data fig 2a 12a b).within the stromal compartment we identified subtypes of myofi- broblast smooth muscle cells pericyte interstitial cells of cajal mesothelium and populations resembling stromal cells previously described in the colon5 (labelled as stromal 1–4) (fig 4d extended data fig 2a).paediatric gdt (trdc) cells did not have tcr sequenc- ing data and did not express specific variable chains (extended data fig 2a).lti-like ncr+ ilc3 lti-like ncr- ilc3 t cell epithelial mesenchymal endothelial myeloid b/plasma cellred blood cells neural a extended data fig 2 | cell types defined in the study.a umap of fetal (top) and pooled paediatric and adult (bottom) epithelial cells as in fig 2a b coloured by gut region.b relative proportions of cell subtypes within total epithelial lineage as in fig 2a b separated by donor age (row).d e umap of enteroendocrine cells (subsetted from fig 2a b) coloured by d (top) developmental age of donor and (bottom) normalised expression of key genes of npw+ enterochromaffin cells and e overlaid with calculated rna velocity (arrows) and pseudotime (colour).]
Summary: Trajectory analysis reveals differentiation paths from progenitors to mature cell types in the epithelial cell population.

Text 388
10.1038/s41586-021-03852-1
Keyword: [trajectory]. Caption: ['fig 2 | epithelial cells and fcgr2a signalling in tuft cells. a, b, uniform manifold approximation and projection (umap) of fetal (a) and postnatal (b) epithelial cell types. key cell types are circled with a dashed line and arrows depict paths of differentiation towards secretory and absorptive enterocytes as determined by scvelo. m cells, microfold cells; ta, transit-amplifying. c, dot plot of tmprss2 and ace2 expression in epithelial cells in the fetal intestine as in a. d, umap of enteroendocrine (eec) and enterochromaffin (ec) cell subsets. arrows depict summarised scvelo differentiation trajectories. c9orf16 is also known as bbln. e, heat map of genes that change along the differentiation trajectory from neurog3-expressing progenitors to enterochromaffin cells (red arrow in d). arrows indicate genes that have known associations with enterochromaffin cell differentiation. f, dot plot with expression of molecules upstream or downstream of the plcg2 pathway in tuft cells and pooled absorptive (ta and enterocytes) and secretory (paneth, goblet and eec) cells. g, per cent expression of fcγ receptor by siglecf+epcam+ and siglecf−epcam+ cells in wild-type mice determined by flow cytometry (individual points represent biological replicates; n=4). using a two-way anova we observe significant interaction between fcγ receptor expression (f(3, 39)=42.29, p=3.05 × 10−11). post-hoc analysis showed significant differences between non-tuft epithelial cells and tuft cells for fcγriib (mean difference=2.80, 95% ci [1.80, 3.81], p<0.0001) and fcγriib/iii (mean difference=4.88, 95% ci [3.88, 5.89], p<0.0001) expression. padj < 0.0001 values corrected with tukey’s test for multiple comparisons. h, schematic of proposed signalling pathways in tuft cells. rtk, receptor tyrosine kinases.']. Reference sentences:[further sub-clustering of the cellular lineages enabled the identification of 133 cell types and states with specific transcriptional identities (extended data fig 2a supplementary tables 3–7).absorptive and goblet cells showed regional separation at all life stages (fig 2a b extended data fig 5a–c 6a b).given that the gut epithelium repre- sents an entry point for sars-cov-215 we also report that both ace2 and tmprss2—which encodes transmembrane serine protease 2—were expressed by enterocytes in early development (fig 2c extended data fig 6c).we delineated genes involved in the differentiation of neurog3 precursors to enterochromaffin cells including recently described genes (marked by arrows) such as fev1920 (fig 2e extended data fig 6e f).to explore the relevance of plcg2 in tuft cells we screened for the expression of upstream receptors (fig 2f extended data fig 6i).fcgr2a which is activated in response to igg and expressed by selected epithelial cells in immu- nized mice21 was specifically expressed by approximately 2.75% of tuft cells (fig 2f).we confirmed the expression of the protein fcgr3 (the mouse orthologue of human fcgr2a) by approximately 5% of small intestinal tuft cells in mice (fig 2g extended data fig 6j).because these are known to be mainly linked to plcg1 activa- tion whether they are also responsible for plcg2 activation in tuft cells is difficult to delineate (fig 2h).252 | nature | vol 597 | 9 september 2021 article with downstream signalling mediators including rac2 itpr2 prkca and trpm5 (fig 2f h)—suggested the ability of tuft cells to respond to immune-cell signalling.we observed arterial venous capillary and lymphatic endothe- lial cells (lecs) (extended data fig 2a 12a b).within the stromal compartment we identified subtypes of myofi- broblast smooth muscle cells pericyte interstitial cells of cajal mesothelium and populations resembling stromal cells previously described in the colon5 (labelled as stromal 1–4) (fig 4d extended data fig 2a).paediatric gdt (trdc) cells did not have tcr sequenc- ing data and did not express specific variable chains (extended data fig 2a).lti-like ncr+ ilc3 lti-like ncr- ilc3 t cell epithelial mesenchymal endothelial myeloid b/plasma cellred blood cells neural a extended data fig 2 | cell types defined in the study.a umap of fetal (top) and pooled paediatric and adult (bottom) epithelial cells as in fig 2a b coloured by gut region.b relative proportions of cell subtypes within total epithelial lineage as in fig 2a b separated by donor age (row).d e umap of enteroendocrine cells (subsetted from fig 2a b) coloured by d (top) developmental age of donor and (bottom) normalised expression of key genes of npw+ enterochromaffin cells and e overlaid with calculated rna velocity (arrows) and pseudotime (colour).]
Summary: Differentiation pathways and gene expression trends in cell development, highlighting specific signaling pathways and cellular interactions.